From Henry A. Wallace, <I>Democracy Reborn</I> (New York, 1944), edited by Russell Lord, 



What America Wants

Delivered at Los Angeles on Friday, February 4, 1944

p. 17.

On this trip to the West Coast, I propose to talk about America Tomorrow. Today I shall speak about what America wants. Later on at San Francisco and Seattle I shall discuss what America can have and how America can get it. We want many different things and some of these are in conflict with others. But let me point out right at the start that the sum total of what we Americans can have is immense. Only a few years ago, when the President said we wanted fifty thousand warplanes a year, some people thought he was being visionary. Today we know that the production of a hundred thousand warplanes a year is a hard reality. So I tell you we can have twice as much far civilian living after the war as we ever had before the war, and you know that is no dream: There are limits, but they are much higher than most people even yet realize.

But we cannot have all these things unless we use good sense and good management. If we try to grab too much, all we shall get is another boom and another collapse. That is why we should think clearly about what each of us wants, and then about how our desires can be made to fit into a practical total, and finally haw to get that total. This is the practical way of planning, creating and enjoying the common welfare.

The first and most important need has to do with the desires of plain folks who have to work for a living in the factories and the stares, in the schoolhouses and the government offices. More than fifty million of these people with their wives and children have just one basic interest in life--the assurance of a steady job. They would like the assurance of an annual salary or, at any rate, the guarantee of two thousand hours of work a year.

Of course labor wants mare than a job, wants more than decent wages; it wants to be appreciated, to feel that it is contributing toward making this world a better place in which to live.

The workers of the United States want assurance that they can have jobs when the seven million service men and the ten million war workers, who by their supreme efforts are saving us during this mighty conflict, find it necessary to get back into peacetime work. They want a plan that will solve the problem when there are more workers than jobs. Nowhere is this situation so acute as right here on the West Coast. When men begin to hunt for jobs, the bargaining power of labor begins to weaken and union funds begin to melt away. Workers everywhere know this and therefore are beginning to think in larger terms than merely bargaining for higher wages, shorter hours and better working conditions. They want to have a part in making those decisions which will determine the future prosperity of the nation. They want to influence government and industry to bring about full use of manpower, full use of resources and full use of technological know-how.

With the United States producing in peace as it has been producing in war, the workers know that they can have opportunities for leisure and culture, and, above everything else possibilities for the real education of their children.

Workers want better insurance against sickness, unemployment and old age. They want the Wagner Act, not as a substitute for full employment, but as insurance against the accidents to which all of us are subject. When, in the postwar period, contracts are cancelled, American labor wants work, not a dole. The Wagner Act can never be a substitute for jobs, but combined with jobs it is admirable.

Organized labor has come of age. It has taken its place as a responsible partner of management in the operation of industry and trade. It has accepted responsibility in war for maintaining an increase in production. It.has the right to ask for fair and honest treatment from the public.

As a responsible partner, labor wants an opportunity to make creative contributions to industry and to benefit therefrom. During the war, hundreds of thousands of workers have submitted ideas for increasing efficiency, enlarging output, saving time and costs, and improving the quality of the product. Labor during the war has enjoyed cooperating with management in doing a real production job, and we must never again let such a rich source of national wealth go untapped.

The farmer has more wants than the worker because he himself is not only a worker but also a manager, a capitalist, a trader and a debtor. The farmer is exposed both to weather and markets beyond his control. A farmer's first desire, therefore, is to remove the extraordinary hazards of his business. His first want is the assurance of decent markets, low freight rates and reasonable marketing costs. The farmers want low interest rates, a chance to buy farm machinery and fertilizer at low prices. As a purchaser, the farmer knows that he has long been victimized by monopolies both when he sells and when he buys. Farmers want good roads, goad schools and rural electrification at low cost. Farmers love the soil and want to be able to handle it so as to leave it to their children better than they found it. Above all, farmers want to produce abundantly, to see the fruits of their labor raise the living standards of mankind.

In recent years farmers have become more and more interested in getting legislation which would give them bargaining power equivalent to that enjoyed by labor and industry. Thousands of farmers have become skilled Washington lobbyists. Having learned the Washington lobby game, they intend to use federal power to hold up farm prices after the war. Some false farm leaders use the farm lobbying power to help business against labor, just as some false union leaders use their lobbying power to help business against the consumer. But the best farm leaders realize that farm prices can be maintained in the postwar period only if labor is fully employed at high wages, just as the, best labor leaders realize that good wages and full employment cannot be long enjoyed unless the farmers are prosperous. All farmers, like all workers, want stability and a rising standard of living.

Some, but not all, big businessmen want that type of control which will produce big profits. They want to put Wall Street first and the nation second. They want to put property rights first and human rights second. They will fight with unrelenting hatred through press, radio, demagogue and lobbyist every national and state government which puts human rights above property rights.

To its own conscience this selfish, narrow-visioned branch of big business puts its desires in mild-sounding phrases somewhat as follows: "We must have an economically sound government and a balanced budget. Government spending must be cut down. We must get rid of that 'so and so' in the White House. Then with government out of business and with Wall Street running the country again, we can have what we want free enterprise. Yes, the free enterprise of old-fashioned America is what we really want."

By free enterprise this type of big business means freedom for freebooters. By free enterprise this type of big business means the privilege of charging monopoly prices without interference by the government; the privilege of putting competitors out of business by unfair methods of competition; the privilege of buying up patents and keeping them out of use; the privilege of setting up Pittsburgh plus price-fixing schemes; the privilege of unloading stocks and bonds on the public through insiders who know their way in and out, up and down, backwards and sideways.

Fortunately, not all big businessmen ask for these privileges or define free enterprise in the way I have just mentioned. Some of them are as deeply concerned with the problem of full employment as labor itself. They are anxious to see such modification in taxation laws as will place the maximum incentive on that type of business activity which will give full employment. Some of these larger businessmen have marvelous new inventions which they would like to put into volume production at the earliest possible moment. Such men are oftentimes more interested in increasing production, and thereby serving humanity, than in making money for money's sake, but they know that even from the standpoint of serving humanity, it is necessary to make a reasonable profit if this private enterprise economy of ours is to survive. Therefore they want the assurance of large and expanding markets.

The small businessman is just as interested in free enterprise as the big businessman, but he means something quite different in his use of the word. Free enterprise to the little businessman means the opportunity to compete without fear of monopoly controls of any kind. The small manufacturer wants free access to markets and the assurance that he will not suddenly find himself crushed by some hostile financial power.

The small businessman in his way is just as much a typical American as the small farmer. Some of his relatives may be workers, some may be farmers or one of them may actually be a big businessman. The small businessman is the source of a large part of the initiative of the United States. The small businessman is humble, ambitious, confused and uncertain. He is not very happy because, in war and in peace, the rate of economic casualties among small businesses is so high.

Moreover, the small businessman is not sure that the situation will be any better for him when peace comes than it is right now. The small businessman wants a fair chance to compete in a growing market with fair access to raw materials, capital and technical research. These desires are not unreasonable but they will require some protection by the government.

Some of the businessmen who most want to serve the world in the postwar period are among those who have rather recently graduated from the ranks of the small businessmen into handling large affairs in the war effort. Because of his unusual capacity, this kind of man has made large sums of money during the war, but has paid nearly all of his profits to the government. He will come out of the war with large plant facilities. He wants to know how to reconvert as fast as possible. His success has often depended largely upon his fine relationship with labor. Appreciating the loyalty of labor, he wants to give his workers jobs in the postwar period, not so much from the standpoint of making money as from the standpoint of doing things both for his workers and for the country. Such men are in some ways the hope of America and of the world. I hope the postwar slump will not be so big when it finally comes as to make it possible for the large static corporations with huge cash reserves to take over the establishments which these energetic men have built so skillfully with the cooperation of loyal labor. Big businessmen must not have such control of Congress and the executive branch of government as to make it easy for them to write the rules of the postwar game in a way which will shut out the men who have made such a magnificent contribution to the productive power of America during the war. We need them to furnish the jobs which are so important both to labor and to agriculture.

The Big Three--Big Business, Big Labor and Big Agriculture--if they struggle to grab federal power for monopolistic purposes are certain to come into serious conflict unless they recognize the superior claims of the general welfare of the common man. Such recognition of the general welfare must be genuine, must be more than polite mouthing of high-sounding phrases. Each of the Big Three has unprecedented power at the present time. Each is faced with serious postwar worries. Each will be tempted to try to profit at the expense of the other two when the postwar boom breaks. Each can save itself only if it learns to work with the other two and with government in terms of the general welfare. To work together without slipping into an American fascism will be the central problem of postwar democracy.

Let us consider for a moment what the Far West wants. It is prodigiously rich in natural resources which promise a greater future development for this region than for any other in the country. To accomplish this development expeditiously, the West will require investment capital, additional transportation facilities and more workers. It will require lower and non-discriminatory freight rates and access to technologies. It will need development of its hydro-power resources and great increases in irrigation to take care of the food requirements of a growing West and a wealthier country generally. The West looks forward to a future in which the trade of the Pacific will rival that of the Atlantic. The West wants and is entitled to more influence in Washington, D. C.

In the broader interests of the nation, it is apparent that what is wanted is a balanced development of all the economic resources of all regions, for whatever raises the economic level of one region creates new markets for other regions.

As citizens, the most urgent want is to be accurately and intelligently informed on all the issues which confront us. There must cease to be secrecy in public affairs, except where military necessity requires. In a democracy public officials must trust the people. The greatest responsibility, however, rests on the press and the other agencies of public information, a responsibility which the workers who gather and prepare the news will enjoy discharging if they are given the opportunity. The press, the radio and the other agencies of public information must take the lead and carry the major responsibility for our greatest assignment in mass education--the education of our people for political and economic democracy.

As citizens of a democracy, we must all be vitally concerned with the adequacy of the education available. Many adults want opportunities to complete their educations, to prepare for better jobs, or to develop new interests. The training of our citizen army has demonstrated the potentialities of adult education to millions; when demobilized, they will demand comparable opportunities in peace.

The wants of the returning service men mean more to us right now than the wants of anyone else. In this year 1944 a grateful nation is determined not to let the service men down. These men are entitled to job priorities and mustering-out pay. They will want the same things as workers and farmers but they will want more. During the war millions of them have learned to walk with death, pain and severe physical hardship. They have learned to love their country with a fierce patriotism. They forgot about money. Big profits, higher wages and higher prices for farm products meant nothing to them. Therefore they learned to hate pressure group warfare. They may return to private life and become a pressure group for the general welfare. Their disgust with pressure group politics, wrongly channeled, could lead to a new kind of fascism, but rightly directed it may result in a true general welfare democracy for the first time in history. These young men will run the country fifteen years hence.

As citizens we want competent and honest government all the way from the local community to Washington. We want a government that uses its powers openly, intelligently and courageously to preserve equality of opportunity, freedom of enterprise and the maximum of initiative for all the people. We want a government which will recognize those things which it can best provide in the interests of all--security of persons and property, freedom of religion, of speech and of thought, education, public health, social insurance, minimum labor standards and fair standards of competition--and then effectively discharge its responsibilities.

As consumers, our wants merge into the general welfare. Our dominant want is for an efficiently functioning economy--full employment of labor, capital and technologies, a balanced development of all regions, the preservation of genuine free enterprise and competition to assure progress and a rising standard of living, the avoidance of business ups and downs, and no exploitation of labor, capital or agriculture.

We all want jobs, health, security, freedom, business opportunity, good education and peace. We can sum this all up in one word and say that what America wants is pursuit of happiness. Each individual American before he dies wants to express all that is in him. He wants to work hard. He wants to play hard. He wants the pleasures of a good home with education for his children. He wants to travel and on occasion to rest and enjoy the finer things of life. The common man thinks he is entitled to the opportunity of earning these things. He wants all the physical resources of the nation transformed by human energy and human knowledge into the good things of life, the sum total of which spells peace and happiness. He knows he cannot have such peace and happiness if the means of earning peace and happiness are denied to any man on the basis of race or creed.

The common man means to get what he is entitled to. Any failure to utilize our resources to the full will cause him to throw over any system which he thinks stands in his way. The impulse of humanity toward full use and full expression is now so intense as to be identical with life itself. We who love democracy must make it politically and economically a capable servant of the irresistible instincts of man and nature.

All of us want to be needed and appreciated. We want to feel that the world would be a poorer place if we died. We want to enjoy the world, contribute to the world and be appreciated by the world each in his own little way.

The bitterness of the depression was that so many millions were cut off by unemployment. That is the bitterness we do not want to see again, when the war is over and the boys come home. We want reasonably full employment so that every American can feel himself a member of his country.

We have the materials to work with. We have the science and technical skills to direct our work. We have innumerable desires for goods and services that we are able to supply. All we need is good management and harmony, less grabbing for ourselves, and more cooperation for the general welfare. Legitimate self-interest can be realized in no other way. By working together for victory in war we have made a resounding success. By working together for the common good in peace we can get results beyond what most Americans have dared to hope.



What America Can Have

Delivered at San Francisco on Monday, February 7 1944

p. 24.

At Las Angeles I sketched briefly what America wants. Here at San Francisco I propose to describe what we can get if we really want it badly enough to plan and work for it.

Let me first do what I can to kill the myth that the gigantic war debt will stand in our way. We can pay the interest an this debt and have a standard of living at least fifty percent higher than in the decade of the thirties. With seasonably full employment we can have a national yearly income of more than 130 billion dollars. We can produce 170 billion dollars of goods and services annually. This is no dream, for in 1943 we produced mare than 190 billion dollars of goods and services. With such an income we can carry the interest on our war debt and still have a whole lot more left over than we had at the tap of the boom in 1929. The interest charge on all debts, private and government, in 1944 will represent only seven percent of our national income or no more than in the decade of the twenties.

But if we allow the thought of the national debt to scare us, it will hang as a millstone around our necks and we shall all be sunk in a sea of unimaginable difficulties. There is just one way to treat the war debt, and that is to remember that it can be carried easily if all of us are able to work hard and to use our natural resources and human skills to the maximum. The goods produced when we work hard and are fully employed will find a market if we raise our standard of living by forty percent. We can enjoy the things we have always wanted and thereby create such prosperity that we can carry the national debt easily; or we can pinch and save and bring an a depression, and let the national debt crush us. Farmers, workers and businessmen can all prosper, provided they are all willing to cooperate with each other and with government in furnishing the American people the things they ought to have, and then in buying and using the things that are offered for sale.

The important point now is to tell the American people about the things they can have two or three years after this war is over. We mustn't take "no" for an answer. The more we insist on getting the right kind of goods, the greater a market there will be for all of us. There is just one proviso. We can't afford to demand things that will hurt the welfare of the American consumers as a whole. Farmers, workers and businessmen can't afford to cut each other's throats.

Now let us talk about these things we can have, things over and above a new car and new radio, things that it is our duty to have if this American civilization is to grow and go forward. First, there is health. The people of. the United States would be at least thirty percent more efficient if they were in maximum goad health. They would then be effective to a ripe old age, instead of often half effective only to middle life. Two generations ago in the United States every city dweller had to boil drinking water or run the risk of dysentery and typhoid. We cut down the death rate enormously when we made it possible for the people in the cities to get safe drinking water at a modest cast. At even less cost than for clean drinking water, we can see that liberal dosages of vitamins are added to flour and cornmeal, thus wiping out at one stroke the vitamin deficiencies which undermine the health and vigor of so many millions of our citizens, especially those who are past forty years of age. At a cost of two dollars per year per person, it would be possible to wipe out all vitamin deficiency diseases, extend the working life of the average individual ten years, and, of course, increase the vigor of at least half of our population. Any intelligent person operating the United States for profit would undoubtedly spend at least 250 million dollars a year for vitamins. By so doing he could get his money back in increased output ten times over the very first year.

Second to good and plentiful food, I would put good and plentiful hospitals. With more hospitals adequately equipped and staffed, combined with a commonsense public health program, we can stamp out tuberculosis, syphilis and possibly malaria. Everyone in the United States ought to have an annual physical checkup and have the privilege of going to a hospital if a competent doctor thinks it necessary. If it is wasteful to let a soldier go without proper medical service, it is just as wasteful to let any American be sick for lack of proper medical attention. We ought to be spending four times as much on hospitals and doctors, and nurses as we are now spending and we should be getting at least ten times as much good out of the medical profession as we now get.

After good health, and closely allied to it, I would put good housing. Most of the houses of the United States are out of date and seriously run down, especially on the farms. Governmental housing authorities, both in England and the United States, have learned a lot about cheap, good housing during the past five years. With money available at low rates and with various types of monopoly rackets eliminated, both government and private industry can build good houses at amazingly low cost. Prefabrication will play its part in bringing the cost down. As soon as we have settled down after the war, we should build at least a million houses a year until such time as we have completely modernized ourselves. Ten years from now we shall find that struggling along with an old house is like tinkering with an old car which every few weeks runs up an expensive garage bill. When the house of the future is perfected as it can be, it will be possible for the housewife to do her cooking, cleaning and marketing with one-third the labor which she now expends.

Next after housing I would list rural electrification. We can furnish electricity to every house in the United States except in those exceptional areas where the population is thin and the distances between farms are too great. With electricity practically everywhere, three-fourths of the housewives should have not merely electric refrigerators but also quick-freeze or deep-freeze machines to carry garden stuff and meat over from the time of seasonal plenty to the time of scarcity. Electricity widely spread, combined with good roads, cheap automobiles and special types of machines for small farms, will result during the next ten or twenty years in millions of families relocating on small acreages within driving distance of the factory or business where the man of the house works. Fifty years ago the slogan "Ten acres and liberty" was a trap which made fools out of most of those who fell for it. But today, with all the conveniences which rural electrification and good roads make possible, five or ten acres can furnish an enjoyable and profitable outlet for the energies of a growing family Sunshine and fresh air, combined with good milk and eggs and the vegetables and fruits which can be preserved the year around, will make the small farm a joy forever to all of those who have any instinct for the soil and the living plants and animals which grow upon it. Rural electrification, and the inventions which naturally go with it, will hasten the march of the common man back to the country and nature. It will restore to the family much of the significance which it had a hundred years ago. A small farmer who works most of the time in town can, with the help of his family, produce more than half of the food which he eats. He can also have a little in the way of vegetables, eggs and milk to sell. Small, part-time farming near a city can become so important by 
the year 1975 as to be one of the significant balance wheels of the nation. 

So far as farmers generally are concerned, there are great things ahead, provided we can avoid a serious slump by having full employment in the nation at large. The future farm economy can easily feed the fifty million undernourished people better, provided they are well employed. Heretofore these people, except during a time of war, have never had enough to eat for the simple reason that they couldn't earn enough to pay for it. The biggest single marketing problem in American agriculture is to make sure that these people earn enough so that they can afford to buy the right kind of food. When the unusual European demand stops, as it probably will within a few years after the war comes to an end, it is important that these undernourished people come into the market with greater demands and more money to pay for what they want.

Technologically, the farmers will benefit from many new devices. In the West there must be more and more land brought under irrigation until all of the surplus water is utilized. Maximum water storage, both for irrigation and for power, will be needed if the Far West is to support the vast population which her manifest destiny so clearly foretells. Nothing must stand in the way of this destiny because it is the destiny of the United States itself to look as much toward the Far East as it now looks toward Europe. I well remember in 1909 sitting in Sacramento with W. A. Beard, the California member of Theodore Roosevelt's Country Life Commission, speculating as to what would have happened if the Pilgrim Fathers had landed at Golden Gate instead of at Plymouth. A New Zealander was saying to me the other day that some day San Francisco will contain as many people as New York City. I can hear the tramp of the coming millions as they move in to fulfill the destiny of the West.

Perfected types of tractors and ground-tillers are certain to come into use after this war. New fertilizers, new varieties of crops, new methods of feeding and better methods of soil conservation will be perfected. The revolution in agriculture which started with improved farm machinery three or four generations ago and with the discoveries of the Experiment Stations will proceed with accelerated pace. The ability of one farm family in the United States to feed itself and four families in town is the strength of our great nation both in war and in peace. This efficiency must and will be further improved. The only thing which can stand in the way of it is unemployment long continued in the cities, for the two indispensable halves of prosperity are growing efficiency matched by growing markets.

Next after improved health, universal electrification and improved agriculture, I would list as a sound business proposition better schools, especially in rural America. Our children can grow up to improve and enrich this nation only if they have good food, good schools and good direction. We need more and better schools, more and better teachers. We need and can have federal aid for those sections of the country where because of poverty the school system is lagging. The poor, agricultural regions are rich in children whereas the rich, city wards are poor in children. Therefore the children and the grandchildren of the poor have a significance far greater even than their own ancestors would have dared hope. The prevention of youth erosion is more important than the prevention of soil erosion. It is even better business to stop youth waste than to stop soil waste. Educational opportunities for young people must come first; but as the Scandinavians discovered, improved adult education is a tremendous additional asset for any nation.

The ten million families at the bottom of the pile in the United States have demonstrated during the past two years that they can do good work, provided they have enough to eat and the opportunity to get good training. The salvation or damnation of the United States depends in considerable measure on how efficiently we can keep these people at work. If they are kept at work at good wages, they can furnish an annual market for at least fifteen billion dollars' worth of goods and services. If these people are at work they will buy something like a million cars a year from the automobile market. The women of these families, if they have the money, will buy nearly two billion dollars' worth of clothing and household furnishings. If they can be assured of steady jobs, these ten million poorest families will furnish a market for at least a hundred thousand new homes every year. Also we shall have, instead of human waste and misery and burdensome charity, ten million busy, hopeful families.

People talk about acres of diamonds or gold mines in the backyard. The real gold mine in our national backyard is the ten million poorest families who before the war bought only about five billion dollars worth of stuff a year, but who can easily furnish a market for fifteen billion if they are given opportunities in the postwar period.

When I talk at Seattle the day after tomorrow, I shall have something to say about how these people can be put to work. Tonight I am only saying that they can and must be given jobs. Their productivity, the size of the market which they can contribute to our businessmen and the health and education of their children mean too much to the rest of us to be neglected.

We can and must give our poorer people a chance to work productively if we are as serious about total peace as we have been about total war. 

Most of the new goods and services we want after the war can be supplied by private enterprise. But some of the services and some of the employment will have to come from public works, which too are a source of employment.

Every township, every county and every city in the United States should list both the private enterprise and the public works projects which it would like some day to have. Provided these schemes have fundamental merit, we can have eventually all the thing's that make for a high standard of living--good roads, airfields, flood control, parks, recreational projects, conservation and planting of forests, conservation of wildlife, conservation of soil, regional T.V.A.s and all that vast multitude of things which the government can do and which no individual can. All of these activities are self-liquidating from a long-run national point of view. They should be carried on in all years except when there is danger of inflation or shortage of labor.

The greatest economic sin is waste of human labor. In the decade of the thirties waste of human labor deprived this country of 200 billion dollars of goods we might have had, or more than the war has cost us to date.

The greatest threat to a balanced budget is unemployment. Unemployment is the one thing that can break all of us. A would-be statesman who in the name of budget-balancing casts a million people their jobs will cost the national income two billion dollars a year. That is a lot to pay for a few wrong ideas. The problem of budget-balancing is first of all one of keeping people fully employed producing efficiently the things we want. We have the people and the resources and the technical "know-how" to produce more than we ever dreamed we could. But we must have also the management "know-how" at the statesmen's level to keep these sources of wealth fully employed. Without that "know-how," our economy will be as helpless as the Army and Navy would be without a General Staff. Then the budget can be balanced and the national debt can be kept under control. No such results can be hoped for if we drift into a kind of unemployment by default. You can't beat something with nothing; we can't beat unemployment with anything but positive programs aimed at full employment.

There will be one great test of statesmanship after the war, and that is: our ability to maintain the maximum useful employment over a long period of years and at the same time preserve our democratic liberties. I say to the people of America that we will win the peace only if we keep the people of our country at work--in freedom, in the increased production of goods that promote the public welfare and give us an opportunity to enjoy life and educate our children. We have proved that in war, when our will is roused to a great purpose, we can put forth efforts and rise to levels of national prosperity beyond anything in our history. We have found the leaders in government, in business, in agriculture and labor who, together with the millions in every walk of life, have revealed our great productive power. In peace, when we are free of the terrific waste of warfare, we can devote our will and our efforts to improving our country and we can attain results beyond anything we ever had previously hoped.

We can, if we will all co-operate, produce more peacetime goods in 1954 than we did of total goods in the war peak year of 1944. The Nazis say that only war can call forth a supreme effort. I say that the challenge of peace is even greater than that of war and that we can and must measure up to it in terms of increased productivity and vital living.


America Can Get It

Delivered at Los Angeles Seattle on Wednesday, February 9, 1944

p. 30.

There once was a man by the name of Job. Job had a lot of hard luck, and worst of all had to listen to the false consolations of three so-called friends. After it was all over, the Lord was pleased with Job and gave him twice what he had had before.

The United States in some ways is like Job. We are now going through great adversity, but after it is all over we can have nearly twice what we had before. The problem with us, as with job, will be largely a spiritual one. Once we get our minds clear and our hearts pure with regard to certain fundamentals, we shall make extraordinary progress. I am not talking about human perfection; I am talking about a little more vision in our own long-range self-interest. Heretofore we have never been permitted to use to the limit our reserve of natural resources, manpower and technological skill. Now we have no choice. There is no halfway point. It is "Pike's Peak or bust." Curiously enough, the full utilization of our resources, manpower and skill is the formula both for our necessity and our blessing. Its application will require a great spiritual strength, and in the process of developing that strength in a practical way we shall bless ourselves and the world. The problem of full utilization of all resources is first economic and second political.

The economic explanation of how civilized nations drifted into practices of scarcity goes back to the rise of factory mass production, the great corporation, vast investment and banker control in behalf of investment security. Modern factory civilization has become highly geared and there is always danger of tremendous over-production unless mass purchasing power is geared to match it. This fear can vanish only if as much imagination is put into the art of distribution as into the science of production. Many who have tried to finance a business in Wall Street have found that scarcity economics is the very heart of the system. The Wall Street financing house will demand control of the most important type of stock issue, and then will want to make sure that a loan to the new concern will not imperil, because of competition and new methods, the loans to older concerns. Wall Street calls this system "businesslike." I deny that it is businesslike, and say that it is the dead hand of the past trying to make a profit by blocking the progress of business. The day has now come when we must release the business system to act through increased production for the benefit of all the people. Many businessmen now understand this as they couldn't have understood it in 1929.

I have asked several friends who have visited Russia during the past eighteen months what we could learn from Russia to make our system work better. Invariably the answer has come back, "Give our workers more incentive, more free enterprise, more initiative. Hold the profit motive out to them in the same way as the Russians." Donald Nelson tells me that he visited a number of towns in eastern Russia and western Siberia which three years ago contained less than 200 thousand people but which today number from 600 thousand to a million. There he saw steel furnaces as large and well-equipped as any we have in the United States. There he saw production goals scientifically set for different groups of workers. There he saw large cash prizes given to the men who went furthest beyond their quotas. The Russians can't understand how we can get along in the United States without giving our workers incentives of this kind. Nearly everyone in Russia feels he is directly working for the welfare of the whole nation. He has no fear whatever that he is being exploited for the sole profit of the management or stockholders.

Another friend, a Latin American who is living in Russia at the present time, wrote me under the date of last November, "What you in the United States preach on Sunday the Russians do here every day."

That the Russians could go so far in the past twenty years and evoke such an extraordinary response from the people in time of stress is the greatest indictment I know of the scarcity economics as practiced by those who believe that profit and free enterprise are only for the few.

We are not going to use the Russian political and economic system here in the United States. It was made for Russia and not for us. But the system of rewarding men for inventing improvements in their own jobs is already well established in some progressive American industries. Once the management and the workers learn to trust each other and to work together, it is proved that they can get a spectacular increase of output. Both Russia and America are showing the advantages of good engineering. Under free competition we may hope that the less progressive companies in America will be obliged to catch up to the best practice. The problem is whether we can modernize the backward areas in our present system so as to make it stand from top to bottom for full use of resources, full use of skills, full use of inventions, without the bottlenecks created by cartels, unfair banking control, unwise labor restrictions, or unenlightened farm leadership. As we face the future, the leaders of the great pressure groups must ask themselves continually, "Is my pressure group in its demands helping the general good? Is my corporation in its program doing what it can to bring about full employment? Or are we just trying to get a rake-off by obstructing full activity? Are we fighting for the biggest piece of the pie as it is, or are we also trying to increase the present size of the whole pie?"

One aspect of modern scarcity economics is the belief that men will work only when they are hungry and that they will stop work when they have enough money to keep their bellies full for three or four days. This cynical attitude of exploitation of the many for the benefit of the few has no place in modern civilization. The moment the many are taught to read and write, to build better homes, to eat better food, to see an occasional movie, to listen to the radio, desire is created and markets are enlarged. People want more and are willing to work to get what they want. This increased longing of the people for light and abundance is going an at an increased tempo all over the world.

The modern Russians, as well as enlightened employers everywhere, have never believed in the "Keep them hungry--keep them in darkness" system of economics. When they evacuated workers by the hundreds of thousands from Leningrad, Kiev, Kharkov and Stalingrad, to escape the advance of Hitler's armies, they evacuated the artists along with the workers. As a result you find today the finest Russian drama and concerts in towns with names which not one of us in a hundred in the United States can pronounce or locate on the map. The Russian art is for the, people, not merely for those who can afford to pay five dollars. The Russians know, and we know, that man cannot live by bread alone. We have been accustomed to think that it was the United States that was prepared to give all men food, education and an opportunity to work and live in freedom. Let us live up to our own national ideal. Once all of us whole heartedly adopt the doctrine of economic abundance instead of economic scarcity, we can have nearly twice as many of the good things of life as we had before. Incidentally, it's the only way in which those who have can hang on to what they've got. We must pull together for a glorious future. We must not pull at cross purposes until a time of dark despair is upon us and archangels rather than ordinary men will be needed to get us out of our mess.

One serious danger of unemployment, for example, is in those industries producing machine tools and machinery far big construction jobs. These industries did a marvelous job preparing us for a magnificent war effort. Their services will be needed all over the world--in China, Russia, India, all Latin America and Africa, and in the United States, building flood control, irrigation and power projects, building roads and equipping factories. At the end of the war we shall have a tremendous surplus of these goods and services. The whole world has a great hunger for them. The question is to discover some sound method by which the world can pay for them. Our young men shall open undreamed-of frontiers which will unleash tremendous purchasing power to keep the world economy revolving for a half century. But these dreams will not come true unless the world can discover some practical method of paying the United States. The basic method of payment is of course through goods. If we keep our people fully employed, we shall require fully twice as much in the way of imports in 1949 as in 1929 in order to keep our factories running. Furthermore, from the standpoint of national security we must purchase certain strategic materials. The United States must build up large permanent stockpiles of those materials of which this country has been proved to be short in time of war and which can be preserved without loss.

Russia wants machine tools. All right, let Russia pay in terms of manganese and platinum, of which she has a surplus. China wants an irrigation system. She has more tungsten than she needs for her own use. Let her pay in terms of tungsten. Persia wants a power project. She can of pay in terms of oil, which we can store in underground reservoirs. Chile wants to build some airports. Let her send us copper and nitrates. There are at least twenty strategic materials of which we are seriously short in the United States as a result of our tremendous war effort. One of the best ways to make sure that there will not be another war is to build up in all the peaceful countries of the world such large supplies of the materials of which each is short that no friendly nation anywhere in the world will ever be caught helpless by sudden attack. The manganese, the copper, tungsten, platinum, oil, etc., will be of great value to us in terms of security and real wealth. The export of these machine tools, equipment and construction services will greatly increase the wealth and production power of friendly nations all over the world. If this is properly done the result in fifteen years will be to draw the world together by highway and airway so that every man in truth will be the brother of every other man. We shall appreciate economic interdependence as we never have before. We shall know that a prosperous Asia helps to make America prosperous. We shall know that the prosperity of the poorest is of great significance to the most well-to-do. It has to be that way in an economy of abundance. It is only in an economy of scarcity that the few can sit on top and scorn the misery of those below.

After the last war several groups of hardheaded businessmen decided that they would make profits for themselves without regard to harmonizing, their individual activities with the needs of our foreign economic policy. One group did its best to expand its sales of goods and services to the world. It made money. Another group loaned money to foreigners and sold bonds to the Americans. It made money. The bonds sold by the second group furnished the money which paid for the goods sold by the first group. Europe got the goods and the services without paying us what she should have paid, for the simple reason that we made it impossible for Europe to pay in the only way she could pay. Because Europe couldn't pay, the unsuspecting investor in the United States got bonds that often turned out to be worthless. The hardheaded businessmen made their profit but they helped destroy the general welfare not only of the United States but of the entire world.

The same type of so-called hardheaded businessmen will exist after this world war as after the First World War. Some of them will have the same kind of unsound finance to sell. We must not let them lead the world astray again. We must not let such men lead us headlong toward another worldwide depression and World War III. The best brake on such men will come from other businessmen who see the world picture more clearly. Such men will help this country to rise to abundant prosperity and in that way will give other countries a greater chance to sell their goods to us. The trading of the United States' goods and services for huge stockpiles which can be unlocked in. times of national emergency is one way of making sure that we get paid for our exports. Another way is to encourage tourist travel.

The furnishing of our goods, services and engineers for the building of great construction jobs all over the world is only a small part of our task of making full employment here in the United States. The big job is to supply to the 135 million people in the United States a standard of living which is at least forty percent higher than it ever was prior to the war. That's the greatest single contribution we can make to greater foreign trade. We must have no business booms, no business busts.

We want efficient planning but without regimentation. Our chief need is the green and red light kind of regulation. We want carefully designed rules of the road which will not block traffic but release it.

In order to get full employment, together with the maximum of free enterprise and profits for the many instead of the few, it will be necessary after the war to use our taxation system for economic objectives much more skillfully than we have in the past. There is just one basis for judgment of our taxation in the postwar period and that is, "Will this system of taxation over a period of years give us the full employment of people producing the kinds of things which the people of the United States most need and want?"

Undoubtedly we shall have to continue with heavy, steeply graduated taxes on personal incomes after the war. But in the case of corporations it would seem to be wise policy to tax in such a way as to force corporate reserves either into the building of plant and equipment or into distribution as dividends. Huge corporate reserves, beyond legitimate business needs, which are held out of use are subtracted from the purchasing power of the nation. In a time of unemployment each billion dollars stored up as savings means at least half a million men unemployed for a year. Unemployed men mean less goods produced and a smaller market. By our taxation system we must encourage the small and rapidly growing enterprise because such enterprises are the seedbed of the employment of the future. But corporations which have lived far beyond the life of the founding father, and which have huge corporate reserves and which no longer expand, represent the dead hand of the past. They should be prodded awake by the right kind of taxation system so that they will find incentive for putting their money to work instead of letting it lie idle.

To get full utilization of all resources for the benefit of all the people, the most important single economic readjustment is to do away with internal trade barriers. I am referring to those monopolistic practices on the part of some manufacturers, bankers, labor unions, doctors and farm organizations which serve their own welfare without regard to the welfare of the unorganized. I don't say that each member of each of these groups deliberately practices scarcity economics. But enough of them do it so that there is continually sand in the bearings of the economic machine. There is enough sand so that ten million families are continually living in poor houses with inadequate clothing, without enough to eat. Except in time of war, ten million families, whether living on the land or in the city, are given an opportunity to produce only about one-tenth as much as their more fortunate fellows. The war has demonstrated what these families can do for themselves, and for the entire nation, provided they are given an opportunity to work without the continuous imposition of bottlenecking controls.

It is not necessary to break up the big organizations which have deliberately produced bottlenecks. But it is necessary that in time of peace there be created a moral climate, backed up by a big stick in the Department of Justice, to convince every monopoly group that in the future its welfare can be served only by that all-out production which serves the welfare of all.

Everyone must recognize that it is sound government policy, even in terms of the large monopolistic groups themselves, for government to stimulate the economic activity of the weak on behalf of abundance economics while restraining the economic freedom of the strong to practice scarcity for temporary self-profit. There is a growing and vigorous support of this position within industry itself.

The experience of Russia during the past ten years and in the United States during the past two years has demonstrated what a tremendous job of production can be done once the monopolistic bottlenecks are effectively broken. In the investment of money, in determining volume of output, in setting prices, in bargaining for wages and hours of labor, the decision made must be the one which best promotes full employment, full production and full consumption.

The leaders of the respective groups must become experts in determining how the activities of any particular group are affected by the public good and how they affect the public good. When the respective pressure groups are led by men who know that the size of the whale pie is more important than the size of the slice they want for themselves, our fear of bread lines and soup kitchens will be over. Then every worker in the United States will have the creative satisfaction of doing his part in helping the common cause.

In many parts of the world there is a small land-owning military clique, composing one percent of the population, sitting on top of the pile exploiting the rest of the population, part of whom are workers and part farmers. The task of the century of the common man is to bring these oppressed people into the market. As their productivity and consumptive power are gradually increased, they will within a few years create for the postwar world new frontiers of unimagined richness--new frontiers of peaceful abundance. It is up to us in the United States to demonstrate by our own example the tremendous productivity and happiness of a general-welfare economy. Latin America will follow our example faster than we think, and as she follows it her economy will benefit ours and our economy will benefit hers. Speaking here in Seattle, I may say the same applies to our relations with China and Siberia. Here at the port which is the closest of all American ports to the Far East, it is important to mention that general-welfare economics and modern technology will make the Far East a market of such vast proportions that eventually there will be as much trade across the Pacific Ocean as there is now across the Atlantic. Private enterprise is dependent upon these broadening markets for its very survival.

The political aspect of getting full utilization of all our powers is more important in some ways even than the economic. By politics I mean the mechanism whereby the people, themselves, thinking in terms of the needs and the welfare of all of the people, make clear their will to the state legislatures and to Congress so that the lawmakers will serve the people more than they do the high-pressure groups which are continually selling the people down the river. The people, standing for just one thing, namely "the maximum use of all our resources in the service of the general welfare," must guide Congress to stand for that objective at all times and to resist all pressure groups except the one big pressure group--the general-welfare pressure group. In action this means that constituents will have the good sense to re-elect Congressmen more for their national statesmanship than for their service to their local groups which are a minority even in the particular Congressional district.

The general-welfare pressure group must believe in democratic planning and must engage in it at the precinct level, the county level, the state level, the regional level. Wall Street and the Wall Street stooges say that such planning is un-American. I say that it is only by such planning that we can preserve and further develop the American way of life. It is only by such planning that we can prevent American fascists from taking us over. When I refer to American fascists I mean those who believe that Wall Street comes first and the country second and who are willing to go to any length through press, radio and demagogue to keep Wall Street safely sitting on top of the country. American fascists at this very moment are desperately striving to control the delegates to the county conventions so that they may in turn control the delegates to the state and national conventions of both parties.

Operating on the precinct level, the people, thoroughly aroused, can at any time they wish throw the American fascists out of control. They can put the man above the dollar and march straight up from the precinct to the county, to the state and to the national convention. They can see that the right men are nominated for Congress and the Senate. They can see that the Congressmen and Senators after they reach Washington are kept informed and eager to respond to Main Street instead of to Wall Street. Dollar principles are all right insofar as they serve human principles, but when they fail in such service they have no meaning except to American fascists.

The issue is very simple. The question is whether the people, keeping themselves fully informed, can operate through democratic government to keep the national interest above the interest of Wall Street. Or will the old-line politicians, financed from Wall Street, again succeed in making Washington the servant of Wall Street. What we need in this country is a new partnership in which Main Street and Wall Street, as well as Washington, will put nothing ahead of all-out production in our America of tomorrow.

The people can come out on top provided they remain continually awake and really believe they can have a higher standard of security and a higher standard of living, and if they will not let up in their fight until they get what they want and must have. They must hold their Congressman responsible for getting that higher standard of living. They must make him feel responsible at all times to the general welfare and above everything to the principle of complete utilization of all resources, all manpower, all skills, in the service of the common man in his search for jobs. In this fight of the people it is quite possible for those who control the big corporations to gum up our system so that it cannot work. It is possible for an incipient American fascism to precipitate a depression which will defeat all the desires of labor and government and most of business. Personally, I think the big corporations are too enlightened today to do a thing of that kind. Statements by the Presidents of the United States Chamber of Commerce and the National Association of Manufacturers indicate that they realize there has been a great change in the moral as well as the business climate. Thousands of businessmen subscribe wholeheartedly to the principle of full utilization. And so I am sure that the managers controlling our great corporations will not deliberately produce a situation where there are twenty million men unemployed. Nevertheless, the people will smash their system unless they are willing to furnish such active leadership in wholehearted co-operation with labor and government as will prevent serious unemployment.

We are in for a profound revolution, partly as a result of the aftermath of two great wars and partly as a result of 150 years of modern technology and democratic thinking about the rights and duties of man. Those of us who realize the inevitability of revolution are anxious that it be gradual and bloodless instead of sudden and bloody. We believe it can be gradual and bloodless if the makers of public opinion, if the politicians, if the pressure-group leaders will only influence their millions of followers on behalf of the public good instead of regional and class prejudices. It would be simple if light could come down from heaven, but we all know that. God helps those who help themselves. The people themselves will have to educate their leaders on behalf of the general welfare, measuring every article in the press, every statement over the radio, every act of Congress by the one yardstick: "Does this help use all our resources, employ all our men, develop all our skills?" If the people everywhere hold these judgments up as a measure, we shall gradually find this principle of "goodness" permeating our national life like a leaven. In no other climate can there be profits for our private-enterprise economy. We must fight with all our might to do this thing. Otherwise we shall have a bloody revolution and slavery. Time is pressing. Victory will bring problems on us so thick and fast that we must be prepared to make instant and correct decisions.

Today we can take the necessary steps. Tomorrow will be too late. We have the resources, both material and human. We have the machines, the tools, and the skills. We have a hundred billion dollars of savings. All we need to do is press forward in confidence, believing in the complete use of all our resources. That confidence must come first; once we have it, the many specific actions on many specific fronts will all add up to a total picture that makes sense.

But if we do not press forward toward total peace in the same complete spirit as we have pressed toward total war, the 100 billion dollars will melt like snow in April and the machines and skills will become a mockery. I can't over-emphasize the time factor. We must have the full-employment, total-use peacetime system ready to begin its march the moment the wartime system slackens. Halfway measures will produce chaos, and a democracy which is afflicted with pressure-group sickness does not have the vitality to stand that chaos. There is one yardstick by which we can judge those who would lead us in the future. Are they or are they not in favor of using our resources to the utmost? When they oppose this or that specific program, are they ready with a concrete alternative to achieve the same end? It is the job of the common man to ask these questions again and again in the years ahead.

Job, before he could enter into his period of abundance when he was to be twice as rich, had to go through his time of misery and then have a change of heart toward God. We are not yet through our misery, but I have faith that we will have sufficient change of heart in all sections of the country and among all groups of our people to correct our pressure-group sickness. We are eager to save ourselves. It was never easier, and it was never more urgent. If all groups know how vitally important is a complete, full-use peace system, if we put the same energy into the peace effort as the war effort, all the rest will be easy. We are the hope of the world. We must set our own house in order so that our light may shine as a comfort and a beacon to the whole world.


The Farm Crisis

A speech delivered by radio, March 10, 1933.

p. 41.

I have just come from a meeting that began two hours ago in my office and that will continue into the afternoon. The purpose is to reach an immediate agreement on a farm relief program that will affect this year's crops. The agreement will have to be immediate. We can't legislate next June for a crop that was planted in April.

There are honest conflicts of opinion. No plan can be perfect. One plan, for example, turns out to be unconstitutional. Another plan has administrative difficulties that defy the wisdom of a Solomon. Another plan may help the wheat people a little more than it helps the cotton people, or vice versa. Our job will be to get a compromise--to combine the most satisfactory features of each into a program.

The problem is clearly revealed. During the few years just preceding 1929, we were selling in foreign markets the product of roughly sixty million acres of land. The value of those exports this past fiscal year was sixty percent below that of 1929. We must reopen those markets, restore domestic markets, and bring about rising prices generally; or we must provide an orderly retreat for the surplus acreage, or both.

For twelve years American agriculture has suffered, and suffered cruelly. This has been largely because the government could not, or would not, formulate the policies that would enable the United States to act as a nation should which is owed money by other nations.

We would not let people who owe us pay their debts in the only way they could--in goods and services. High tariffs prevented that. For a while we loaned our debtors additional funds with which to buy goods from us, but after a few years that method of lifting ourselves by our bootstraps collapsed. We could not sell our surplus farm products to them, partly because they could not sell enough to us, partly because of retaliatory tariffs, and partly because of the drive for economic self-sufficiency among European nations.

Today in this country men are fighting to save their homes. That is not a figure of speech. That is a brutal fact, a bitter commentary on agriculture's twelve years' struggle. What do we propose to do about it? The least we can do is to stay the cruel process of dispossessing farmers from their homes. In adjusting this farm-debt load, creditors also must expect to share in the losses.

It will take time to bring about an effective demand for our surplus products at home and abroad. There is little likelihood of an effective demand abroad for our surplus farm products during the next two years. Negotiating reciprocal tariffs may restore a part of this market, but those negotiations will take time. The European nations, making desperate efforts to act as debtor nations logically must, have increased their tariffs on American farm products and have handled their currency exchanges so as to make almost impossible any large purchases of American farm products. Furthermore, they have increased their wheat and hog production as much as possible.

Meanwhile, we must adjust downward our surplus supplies until domestic and foreign markets can be restored.



A Declaration of Interdependence

A speech delivered by radio, May 13, 1933.

p. 43.

The new Farm Act, which the President signed yesterday, initiates a program for a general advance of buying power. It is not an isolated advance in a restricted sector; it is part of a large attack on the whole problem of depression.

Agriculture and tradesmen must make their way together out of a wilderness of economic desolation and waste. This new machinery will not work itself. The farmers and the distributors of foodstuffs must use it, and make it work. The government can help map lines of march, and can see that the interest of no one group is advanced out of line with the interest of all. But government officials cannot and will not go out and work for private businesses. A farm is a private business; so is a farmers' cooperative; and so are all the great links in the food distributing chain. Government men cannot and will not go out and plow down old trails for agriculture, or build for the distributing industries new roads out of the woods. The growers, the processors, the carriers and sellers of food must do that for themselves. Following trade agreements, openly and democratically arrived at, with the consumer represented and protected from gouging, these industries must work out their own salvation. This emergency Adjustment Act makes it lawful and practical for them to get together and do so. It provides for a control of production to accord with actual need, and for an orderly distribution of essential supplies.

In the end, we envision programs of planned land use; and we must turn our thought to this end immediately; for many thousands of refugees from urban pinch and hunger are turning, with little or no guidance, to the land. A tragic number of city families are reoccupying abandoned farms, farms on which born farmers, skilled, patient, and accustomed to doing with very little, were unable to make a go of it. In consequence of this back-flow there are now thirty-two million people on the farms of the United States, the greatest number ever recorded in our history. Some of those who have returned to farming will find their place there, but most of them, I fear, will not. I look to a day when men and women will be able to do in the country the work that they have been accustomed to doing in the city; a day when we shall have more industrial workers out in the open where there is room to live. I look to a decentralization of industry; but in this respect we shall have to make haste slowly. We do not need any more farmers out in the country now. We do need there more people with some other means of livelihood, buying, close at hand, farm products; enriching and making more various the life of our open-country and village communities.

The Act authorizes the Secretary of Agriculture to apply, excise taxes on the processing of these products, and to pay the money thus derived to farmers who agree to enter upon programs of planned production, and who abide by that agreement. These processing taxes will be put on gradually. Few, if any, will be levied before fall; and then we shall make them as light as we can and yet bring about the required reduction in acreage. In no case will taxes be levied on products purchased for the unemployed.

What it amounts to is an advance toward higher prices all along the line. Current proposals for government cooperation with industry are really at one with this Farm Act. Unless we can get re-employment going, lengthen payrolls, and shorten breadlines, no effort to lift prices can last very long. Our first effort as to agriculture will be to adjust production downward, with safe margins to provide enough food for all. This effort we shall continue until such time as diminishing stocks raise prices to a point where the farmer's buying power will be as high as it was in the pre-war years, 1909 to 1914.

The reason that we chose that period is because the prices farmers got for their crops, in those years, and the prices they paid for manufactured goods and urban services most nearly approached an equitable relationship. There was thus a balance between our major producing groups. At that time there was not the terrific disparity between rural and, urban purchasing power which now exists and which is choking the life out of all forms of American business.

We do not propose to reduce agricultural production schedules to a strictly domestic basis. Our foreign trade has dwindled to a mere trickle; but we still have some foreign customers for cotton, tobacco, and certain foodstuffs; we want to keep that trade and to get more foreign trade, if we can. The immediate job is to organize American agriculture to reduce its output to domestic need plus that amount which we can export at a profit. If the world tide, turns and world trade revives, we still can utilize to excellent advantage our crop adjustment and controlled distribution setup. We can find out how much they really want over there, and at what price; and then we can take off the brakes and step on the gas.

The first sharp downward adjustment is necessary because during the past years we have defiantly refused to face an overwhelming reality. In consequence, changed world conditions bear down on us so heavily as to threaten our national life.

Ever since 1920, hundreds of thousands of farm families have had to do without civilized roads and services which in normal times they were glad and eager to buy. Since 1929, millions of farm people have had to patch their garments, store their cars and tractors, deprive their children of educational opportunities, and cease, as farmers, to improve their practices and their property. They have been forced to let their homes and other buildings stand bare and unpainted, eaten by time and the weather. They have been driven toward peasant, or less than peasant, standards; they have been forced to adopt frontier methods of bare sustenance at a time when, in the old surging, unlimited sense of the word, we have no longer a frontier.

When the farmer gets higher prices, he will start spending. He will have to. He needs things. He needs new shoes and clothing for all the family, so that his children can go to school in any weather with dry feet, protected bodies, and a decent American feeling of equality and pride. He needs paint and roofing, fencing, machinery and so on, endlessly.

To reorganize agriculture, co-operatively, democratically, so that the surplus lands on which men and women now are toiling, wasting their time, wearing out their lives to no good end, shall be taken out of production--that is a tremendous task. The adjustment we seek calls first of all for a mental adjustment, a willing, reversal, of driving, pioneer opportunism and ungoverned <I>laissez-faire</I>. The ungoverned push of rugged individualism perhaps had an economic justification in the days when we had all the West to surge upon and conquer; but this country has filled up now, and grown up. There are no more Indians to fight. No more land worth taking may be had for the grabbing. We must experience a change of mind and heart.

The frontiers that challenge us now are of the mind and spirit. We must blaze new trails in scientific accomplishment, in the peaceful arts and industries. Above all, we must blaze new trails in the direction of a controlled economy, common sense, and social decency.

There have been delays in the passage of this Act. Meanwhile the planting season has advanced, and our assigned task of adjusting production to effective demand has become infinitely more difficult. We cannot proceed as if this were the middle of winter. Perhaps our wisest course will be to concentrate on those commodities most in need of adjustment, and on which the adjustment decided upon, this late in the season, can be practical and effective.

To help us in these determinations, we shall have here in Washington within a few days representatives of agriculture and representatives of the processing and distributing trades. Bearing their recommendations in mind, we shall decide just what action to take, and when to take it. As each decision is made we shall get it out directly and publicly to the farmers affected, and launch organization efforts throughout the Nation.

Unless as we lift farm prices we also unite to control production, this plan will not work for long. The only way we can effectively control production for the long pull is for you farmers to organize, and stick, and do it yourselves. This Act offers you promise of a balanced abundance, a shared prosperity, and a richer life. It will work, if you will make it yours, and make it work. I hope that you will come to see in this Act, as I do now, a Declaration of Interdependence, a recognition of our essential unity and of our absolute reliance one upon another.




The Cotton Plow-Up

A speech delivered by radio, August 21, 1933.

p. 52.

On one of the largest cotton plantations in Mississippi I saw a dramatic instance of America's present effort to catch its balance in a changed world.

There were two immense fields of cotton with a road between them. On one side of the road men with mules and tractors were turning back into the earth hundreds of acres of thrifty cotton plants nearly three feet high. On the other side of the road an airplane was whipping back and forth at ninety miles an hour over the same kind of cotton and spreading a poison dust to preserve it from destruction by the boll weevil.

Both of these operations were proceeding side by side on the same farm, and both in our present critical state of economic unbalance were justifiable and necessary. There are those, of course, who would say that with too much cotton the right thing to do would be simply to let the weevil at it and trust to luck. We have been trusting to luck too long. Insects have very small brains. They cannot be counted upon to get us out of troubles of our own making. Clumsily, to be sure, but with a new vigor and an eye to realities, we have started to take hold of this strange situation at both ends in an effort to bring sense and order into our use of land.

Thus far we have been ruled by events quite as much as we have ruled events; but considering the shortness of time and the pressure upon us I think that we have done a fairly good job. What we have done is only the barest beginning of all we shall have to do. The new social and economic machinery that we have set going in this country since March 4 is as crude and as promising as Robert Fulton's first steamboat.

Our present efforts are only hasty patchwork when compared with the intricate thinking and social planning that will be required. All of us working together will learn how to do these things better as we go along.

Nearly nine-tenths of the nation's two million cotton farmers agreed to co-operate in the emergency adjustment drive. They are taking ten and a half million acres out of cotton and reducing the national cotton acreage more than one-fourth. Is this a good thing to do? In view of the circumstances, yes. It was too bad to have to turn all that product of wasted effort back into the ground. But it would have been a great deal more destructive and wasteful to have kept on going blindly, driven before the forces of a rampant, competitive individualism to a general smash.

Leaders of the Cotton South assure me that they will soon have a plan ready so that next year they will not plant cotton in the unlimited, plan-less way they have in the past. Instead of planting around forty million acres of the United States to cotton, it seems likely that we shall put in only about twenty-five million acres next spring.

This month, with the aid of 30,000 field workers, most of them volunteers, we are putting before the 1,200,000 American farm families that grow wheat a proposal to reduce, perhaps as much as one-fifth, their sowings of wheat for the next two years. The exact degree of reduction depends on whether other nations decide to come along with us in this effort to adjust wheat harvests to prevailing demand. They have promised to let us know by next Thursday. I will make an announcement then. If these other countries will not co-operate the United States will go ahead alone.

We have had more time to plan and organize for a balanced wheat crop than we had in the case of cotton; but the three-year plan we are now putting into operation is an emergency measure only; it will not take care of the long-time situation. Again, like the cotton plan, it is only a start. The cotton plan, the corn and hog plan, the dairy, tobacco, fruit, and wheat programs that we are now launching--all these are experimental first steps in a new direction. Once you take the first step in that direction, you are forced to other steps and a wider outlook.

From that outlook, we begin to see that American progress thus far has been very largely a matter of beginner's luck. What we have called business sagacity in the past often turns out, when candidly examined, to be no more than a bet on the future of a continent which, at the time the bet was made, was incompletely exploited.

"Don't sell America short," was our motto; and for three hundred years or so our pioneers, our businessmen and all of us scrambled without limit to put our stakes on a sure thing. If you couldn't make money farming, you could probably make it speculating in land. If you couldn't make it by building a better mouse trap than your neighbor, you could probably get along by selling gilt-edged shares in Mouse Trap, Preferred. No wonder, as a nation, we came to believe that some sort of economic magic took care of us, and got us out of all the troubles that our greed and thoughtlessness brought down upon our heads from time to time.

We are not at the end of our progress as a civilized people. When we lose faith in gambling and turn toward fundamental values we shall make this country a better place in which to live. As a start, we have undertaken to put our farmland, the basis of our entire national structure, into better order. In consequence, we are forced to think of what we ought to do with the forty million marginal acres of plowland we are going to take out of cultivation, because the world no longer will pay us for the extra wheat, cotton, and corn we have been growing there. It looks as if we were being forced for the time being toward a self-contained national economy, whether we like it or not. It is certain that we are farming a good deal of land that ought not to be farmed. Much better land, on which a family would have a chance to make a decent living, could be drained, irrigated, rescued from washing away, or otherwise reclaimed. In view of this, President Roosevelt has announced that as fast as good new land is brought into production, a corresponding amount of inferior land will be taken out. This may mean bringing in one acre and taking out ten. It may mean planned migrations from one region to another.

But we are not going to have a random expansion of farm production, conducted without regard to human values, as we have had in the past. One of the great tragedies that has come out of the haphazard settlement of this country is to be found where families of the best blood and training, folks with a fine point of view and a fundamental philosophy, are slaving their lives away on farms that are not fit to work or live on. We want to fix things so that people are working where their labor will readily do some good, where they will have a real opportunity and the joy of working and creating without being penalized for it. The thing to do now is to farm only land that is worth farming and farm it better than ever. We need clearer thinking and the kind of efficiency that strikes down to fundamentals and builds from there.

When a country fills up and all the land and easy money are taken, the people of that country face problems that they have never met before. In attacking these problems Americans will shift in same measure from their ancient competitive, individualistic standards. Sooner or later, the question, "What is there in it for me?" will have to be translated into, "What is there in it far all of us?" I know how hard it is to change human nature, but human nature does respond to changed conditions; and it becomes plainer all the time that modern capitalistic society faces the choice between a widely, generously shared prosperity or none at all.

The millennium is not yet here, although the makings of it are clearly in our hands.



The Engineering-Scientific Approach

A paper delivered before the American Association for the Advancement of Science, Boston, December 29, 1933.

p. 57.


I suppose you are all more or less familiar with that concept of the cyclical rhythm of civilization which has been popularized in recent years by Petrie, the Egyptologist, and Spengler, the German philosopher. According to this analysis, a civilization takes its origin in a profound, but as yet unexpressed new attitude on the part of a virile, agricultural people toward the universe. This profound, original feeling gives the bias to subsequent events throughout the life of the civilization. First, it manifests itself in great cathedrals and sculpture, next in painting, literature, and music, followed by science, mechanics, and wealth, and finally it manifests itself in dissolution which comes because of a lack of faith in the worthwhileness of the original attitude toward the universe and because of disgust with the material results which have finally been inspired by that attitude. According to this analysis we have now come to the late fall, the eventide of this civilization, and the coming of the engineer is like the coming of Indian summer in late October just before the cold and dreary days of winter.

Philosophical analysis of this sort, even when backed up by archeological research, can of course be merely suggestive. But after our experience with the World War and the depression of the past four years, we are led to question the American credo, based as it has been on faith in Progress Unlimited, derived from endless mechanical invention, improved methods of mass production, and ever-increasing profits. Without accepting either the implicit pessimism of the Spenglerian Twilight philosophy or the Pollyanna optimism of the old-fashioned American go-getter, I would ask you to examine superficially with me the contributions of science and engineering, the dilemma thereby created, and a possible way out.

For a hundred years the productivity of the so-called civilized world has increased at the rate of about three percent annually. Corrected for increase in population, the output per capita has increased at the rate of about one percent annually. In the United States the rate of increase of material wealth has perhaps been a little faster than this. But everywhere there has been apparent a little slowing down during the World War and especially since 1930. And so we have, on the one hand, those people who proclaim that inevitably the pre-depression trend will be resumed, and those who, on the other hand, say that the time of the quantitative expansion of man's control over nature is now rapidly coming to a close. 

Engineering and science, combined with the division of labor, have made it possible for an hour of man-labor on the farm to produce several times as much as it did a hundred years ago. In company with the rest of you I have from time to time marveled over the tremendous contribution of the reaper, the binder, the combine, the truck, the tractor and the gangplow, but inasmuch as we have now come to days of real soul-searching about all, the things which we have hitherto called Progress, I think it is high time for all of us to analyze these various labor-saving devices a little more critically. Do they really save as much as appears on first glance?

True it is that the farmer puts in only a mere fraction of his own labor in producing wheat, as compared with a century ago, but what about the labor of the men who made the combines and the plows and the tractors? What of the labor of the men who transport the wheat the thousand miles to market, of the vast distributing and advertising machinery which seems to be necessary if we are to operate on the broad scale apparently required by the modern adaptations of engineering and scientific discoveries? Personally, I am inclined to think there is a real net gain, but it is a gain of the sort which can easily be lost altogether unless certain social adaptations are very rapidly perfected.

The change from the back-breaking cradle of our forefathers to the modern combine ought to mean a tremendous release of human energy on the farm for something besides growing and harvesting a crop. The days when wheat was broadcast by hand, perhaps from a saddle horse, in retrospect seem quite romantic, but to the farmer who had to spend days at seeding-time where he now spends hours, the romance probably wore pretty thin. The grind of the harvest of years ago, the sweat of men in the field and women in the kitchen, was an honorable thing, and even celebrated in song and story; but it didn't leave much time for living. The engineers and the scientists have given us the instruments and the methods whereby we can escape much of the grind; theoretically, there ought to be far more time for living and far more with which to enjoy life. Yet the reverse, seems to be poignantly true.

The men who invented our labor-saving machinery, the scientists who developed improved varieties and cultural methods, would have been bitterly disappointed had they seen how our social order was to make a mockery of their handiwork. I have no doubt they felt they were directing their talents to free mankind from the fear of scarcity, from the grind of monotonous, all-absorbing toil, and from the terrors of economic insecurity. Things have not worked out that way.

I do not mean to imply that there have been no gains. Of course there have been net gains, even if incommensurate with the hopes and promise of science. Plainly we must hold those gains, and add to them rapidly and extensively; but I think we can do this only if the planning of the engineer and the scientist in their own fields gives rise to comparable planning in our social world.

So far as science and engineering are concerned, I see no reason why the rate of expansion which characterized the "Century of Progress" should not be increased, at least for a time. While there are certain ultimate limitations in our supplies of coal, iron, petroleum, and in soil fertility, it is obvious to most of us who are close to any particular phase of scientific research or technical organization that there are imminent discoveries which; when applied, will increase per capita output enormously. Nearly every technical man knows in his heart that from a purely scientific, engineering point of view the most amazing things could be done within a relatively short period. Of course, in the world of hard fact the full effect of any revolutionary invention is not felt typically for fifteen or twenty years. But I feel safe in saying that our scientists and inventors today have enough new stuff within their grasp or just around the corner so that the world thirty years hence could easily have a total productive power twice that of today.

It is almost equally possible that the total wealth-producing power of the world a generation hence will be less than it is today. The trouble, if it comes, will not be in the inability of scientists and technologists to understand and to exploit nature, but in the ability of man to understand man and to call out the best that is in him. In salving this limitation the scientists and engineers have all too often been a handicap rather than a help. They have turned loose upon the world new productive power without regard to the social implications. One hundred years ago the power looms of England destroyed the cottage weaving industry, and during the early years of that impact misery strode over the countryside of England in proportion as the <I>nouveaux riches</I> gained capital to exploit their gains over the entire world. That kind of thing has been done again and again, and we have called it progress because the power of man over nature was increasing and because in the long run the common man shared in this increase. What happened to the common man in the short run, of course, could be of no concern to a <I>laissez-faire</I> society.

Most of us, whether scientists, businessmen, or laborers, have until recently looked back on the Century of Progress and called it good, but today the afflictions of Job have descended upon us and we must of necessity argue with Bildad, the Shuhite, and set ourselves right with our God before we go forward into a prosperity twice that which we enjoyed before.

Acting perhaps in the capacity of Bildad, I would like to suggest that the very training which made possible the enormous material expansion of the past century may to some extent have made impossible the building of a just social system far the prompter and more uniform distribution of the wealth produced by the system. Most of the scientists and engineers were trained in <I>laissez-faire</I>, classical economics, and in natural science based on the doctrine of the struggle for existence. They felt that competition was inherent in the very order of things, that "dog eat dog" was almost a divine command.

The power discovered by the scientists and inventors was applied in the United States by a race of men who had developed a concentrated individual willpower and an extraordinary thriftiness as a result of several generations of pioneer agricultural training and Protestant churchgoing. As a result, human power of high spiritual origin, but debased by the sophistication of the "devil take the hindmost" economics of the colleges, took command of the exploitation of the discoveries made by the scientists and inventors. The scientists and inventors have an intense kind of religion of their own--certain standards to which they like to be true--and as long as they could get enough money to pursue their researches, why should they care how someone else handled the social and economic power derived from these researches? Perhaps that is putting the matter unkindly, but other explanations that might be advanced are not much more flattering. Those who delved too deeply into social and economic problems got into trouble, and so many of the best scientists felt it was not good form to do things which to certain types of mentality seemed impractical and which might endanger science's financial support.

It is my observation that previous to 1933 more than three-fourths of the engineers and scientists believed implicitly in the orthodox economic and social paint of view. Even today I suspect that more than half of the engineers and scientists feel that the good old days will soon be back when a respectable engineer or scientist can be an orthodox stand-patter without having the slightest qualm of conscience. It is so nice to feel that there are great supermen from whom, directly and indirectly, you draw your own sustenance, who, sitting Jove-like above us lesser mortals, make possible the free functioning of the law of supply and demand in such a way that their profits enlarge at the same rate that our research expands. Like most of you in this audience, I rather like that kind of world, because I grew up in it; in some ways, I wish we could get back to it. But both my mind and my instinct tell me that it is impossible for any, length of time. Of course if prosperity returns within the next year or two, it is possible for us to think that we are back in that old world again. But unless the people who make profits and direct capital allocation to different productive enterprises have seen a great light, or unless we move forward into certain highly centralized forms of industrial and governmental control, we shall sink back into our former trouble.

There ought to be more than a little hope, it seems to me, in the fact that our engineers have demonstrated so successfully their skill in planning. In many great industries, the engineers have been able to mark out the contours of expansion and development ten to fifteen years ahead. If in the past they seemed to be guided by purely material and mechanical considerations, that has doubtless been because such considerations were necessarily the chief ones so long as we were conquering a continent. Today it is becoming increasingly evident that we must take into account the qualitative as well as the quantitative expansive aspects. This would suggest that in the engineering courses of the future the engineers should be given an opportunity really to enrich their minds with imaginative, non-mathematical studies such as philosophy, literature, metaphysics, drama, and poetry. Of course so long as an engineer is burdened with the necessity of putting in eighteen hours a day mastering calculus, mechanics, and the complex theories of electricity, he simply cannot glue any effective attention to the cultural aspects of life. And if by accident an engineer, exposed to studies of this sort, should be enthused by them, he might for the time being become somewhat less effective as an engineer. We are thus exposed to a dilemma, which I would be tempted to solve by saying that probably no great harm would be done if a certain amount of technical efficiency in engineering were traded for a somewhat broader base in general culture.

It is difficult to see how the engineer and the scientist can much longer preserve a complete isolation from the economic and social world about them. A world motivated by economic individualism has repeatedly come to the edge of the abyss, and this last time possibly came within a hair's breadth of plunging over. Yet science, all this time, has been creating another world and another civilization that simply must be motivated by some conscious social purpose, if civilization is to endure. Science and engineering will destroy themselves and the civilization of which they are a part unless there is built up a consciousness which is as real and definite in meeting social problems as the engineer displays when he builds his bridge. The economist and the sociologist have not yet created this definite reality in their approach; can you, trained in engineering and science, help in giving this thought a definite body?

Today when the industrial nations of the world have skimmed most of the cream off the backward nations and the backward classes, and when there are no longer any challenging geographical frontiers to be conquered, it becomes apparent that we must learn to co-operate with each other instead of joining together in the exploitation of someone else. This means building a social machinery as precise and powerful as an automobile engine. How extraordinary is the patient vigor of thought which enables a group of engineers to blueprint and execute a new design! And how sloppy by comparison is our economic blueprinting and execution!

But it must be said in defense of the economists that their problem is infinitely more difficult than that of the engineer. The economic engineer has had no excuse for existence until recently, because no one gave him any orders for blueprints. Even yet the objectives are so loosely defined, the popular will is in such a state of flux, that the designing of the economic engineer is about like that of an automotive engineer who discovers after he has completed his engine that it was to go into a tractor instead of an automobile.

As I have said to many farm audiences, we are children of the transition--we have left Egypt but we have not yet arrived at the Promised Land. We are learning to put off the hard-boiled language of the past, but we have not yet learned to speak the co-operative language of the future. One is as different from the other as a human being is different from an animal. There need be nothing impractical, there need be nothing foolishly idealistic about a Christian, co-operative, democratic State.

We know that there must be a balance between productive power and consumptive power, and that excessive profits used to expand productive power beyond consumptive power are sure to lead to a breakdown. We know that the continued insistence on heavy exports in excess of imports by a creditor nation is bound to lead to disaster. We know today that the great unemployment is in the so-called heavy industries, and that this could be remedied if faith in a profound new excitement swept the country like the railroad-building boom of the early eighties or the automobile boom of the twenties. This boom might take the form of totally new railroad equipment, or the popularization of new and better airplanes, or the making fashionable of winter homes and winter industries for everyone in the South and a duplicate summer set in the North. In any event, whatever is done to stimulate the heavy industries it is to be hoped that the bonds issued to pay for the stimulation will be an a long-term, amortized, low-interest basis.

We know that we must have a monetary system which will bring about a better balance between debtor and creditor and between productive power and consumptive power. These things can be measured and social machines can be built to deal with them, but before success . can be expected, there must run through the rank and file of the people a feeling that amounts to a profound determination to deal with social problems.

There is something about engineering which tends to lay emphasis on logical, cold, hard, lifeless facts. Nearly all engineers have suffered the common punishment resulting from the remorseless discipline of higher mathematics, physics, and mechanics. No man has to work in college as the engineer. As a result, the engineer sometimes imputes a value to precise mathematical reasoning which it does not always have. There, is such a thing as life, and the mathematics of life is as far beyond the calculus as the calculus is beyond arithmetic.

We can see in Mendelian genetics a complex algebra which has proved to be of some analytical use in determining the mechanism of heredity. Nevertheless, from the standpoint of producing superior plant and animal organisms, the engineering mathematical approach to life has not yet been especially successful. It seems to me that the emphasis of both engineering and science in the future must be shifted more and more toward the sympathetic understanding of the complexities of life, as contrasted with the simple, mathematical, mechanical understanding of material, production.

The quantitative answers produced, by the science of the past hundred years are not enough. They merely increase the speed of life without increasing the quality. Would that we had someone with the imagination of Sir Isaac Newton to develop the higher calculus of the engineering of life which is so necessary if our increased productive power is to increase total human happiness!

Haven't you sometimes wondered whether this whole Century of Progress might not be just a superficial and temporary phenomenon after all? The increase of physical output in three generations is so extraordinary that we have tended to think that this is what man is meant for. It seems to me a terribly inadequate yardstick of civilization. A man has food, clothing, and shelter; wherein does he differ from the beasts of the field? Surely these are not the things which distinguish the civilized from the uncivilized. Food and shelter and the other necessaries in any rational order ought to go without saying. They ought to be as automatic and as universal, in this day of technological achievement, as the air we breathe. It is from this point on that life begins.

A characteristic of the engineer is his willingness to face the cold truth about the task to which he addresses himself. Engineers have brought to their jobs a more fully developed intellect than any other class of our citizenry. Sloppy, opportunistic thinking is simply inexcusable in the engineering world. I would be the last to suggest that the engineer abandon the precision of his thinking and his honesty in facing facts. I am merely asking that the same qualities be brought to bear insofar as possible on the more complex situations which have to do with living organisms and our social life.

In brief, then, we wish a wider and better controlled use of engineering and science to the end that man may have a much higher percentage of his energy left over to enjoy the things which are non-material and non-economic, and I would include in this not only music, painting, literature, and sport for sport's sake, but I would particularly include the idle curiosity of the scientist himself. Even the most enthusiastic engineers and scientists should be heartily desirous of bending their talents to serve these higher human ends. If the social will does not recognize these ends, at this particular stage in history, there is grave danger that Spengler may be proved right after all, and a thousand years hence a new civilization will be budding forth after this one has long laid fallow in a relative Middle Ages.



America Must Choose

An excerpt from Wallace's 1934 pamphlet <I>America Must Choose.</I>

p. 78.

Much as we all dislike them, the new types of social control that we have now in operation are here to stay and to grow on a world or national scale. We shall have to go on doing all these things we do not want to do. The farmer dislikes production control instinctively. He does not like to see land idle and people hungry. The carriers dislike production control because it cuts down loadings. The processors dislike it because of the processing tax. The consumer dislikes it because it adds to the price of food. Practically the entire population dislikes our basic program of controlling farm production; and they will do away with it unless we can reach the common intelligence and show the need of continuing to plan. We must show that need of continuing if we are to save in some part the institutions which we prize.

Enormously difficult adjustments confront us, whatever path we take. There are at least three paths: internationalism, nationalism and a planned middle course. We cannot take the path of internationalism unless we stand ready to import nearly a billion dollars more goods than we did in 1929. What tariffs should we lower? What goods shall we import? Tariff adjustments involve planning just as certainly as internal adjustments do. Even foreign loans might involve a certain amount of planning. When we embarked on our terrific postwar expansion of foreign loans, we did not plan. We plunged in blindly, and soon any reasonable observer could predict that the whole thing was bound to blow up.

We did not then in our boisterous youth have the same view that England had after the Napoleonic Wars. Rather consciously Great Britain placed its loans with a long-time program of imports and an exchange of goods in view. Our own adventure was only from the short-time profit consideration. What tariffs to lower? What goods to accept? How readjust our own farming operations and industrial operations to the planned inflow of foreign goods? We scarcely gave such things a thought.

I shall here try to sketch the probable price--in terms of the actual and psychological pain of readjustment--of following the national, the international, or a rigorously planned middle trail out of the woods.

As a foundation and framework of a new American design, we have undertaken to put our farmland into better order. What we have done has been frankly experimental and emergency in nature, but we are working on something that is going to be permanent.

If we finally go the whole way toward nationalism, it may be necessary to have compulsory control of marketing, licensing of plowed land, and base and surplus quotas for every farmer. Every plowed field would have its permit sticking up on its post.

I have raised the question whether we as a people have the patience and fortitude to go through with an international program when the world seems with varying degrees of panic to be stampeding the other way. It is quite as serious a question whether we have the resolution and staying power to swallow all the words and deeds of our robust, individualistic past, and submit to a completely armylike, nationalist discipline in peacetime.

Our own maneuvers of social discipline to date have been mildly persuasive and democratic. I want to see things go on that way. I would hate to live in a country where individual thought is punished or stifled, and where speech is no longer free. Even if the strictest nationalist discipline reared for us here at home, exclusively, a towering physical standard of living, I would consider the spiritual price too high. I think, too, that this would be pretty much the temper of the rest of the country; but there is no telling. Regimentation without stint might, indeed, I sometimes think, go farther and faster here than anywhere else, if we once took the bit in our teeth and set out for a 100 percent American conformity in everything. The American spirit as yet knows little of moderation, whichever way it turns.

A surprising number of farmers, after a year of voluntary production control, are writing me letters insisting that hereafter the co-operation of all farmers be compelled absolutely; and that every field, cotton gin; cow, and chicken be licensed; and that the strictest sort of controls be applied to transportation and marketing. I believe they mean it, but I wonder very seriously whether they are ready for such measures, and if they really know what they are asking for.

The middle path between economic internationalism and nationalism is the path we shall probably take in the end. We need not go the whole way on a program involving an increase of a billion dollars a year in imports. There are intermediate points between internationalism and nationalism, and I do not think we can say just where we are headed yet. We shall be under increasing difficulties, no matter which way we tend, as our people become more and more familiar with the discomforts of the procedure.

My own bias is international. It is an inborn attitude with me. I have very deeply the feeling that nations should be naturally friendly to each other and express that friendship in international trade. At the same time we must recognize as realities that the world at the moment is ablaze with nationalist feeling, and that with our own tariff impediments it is highly unlikely that we shall move in an international direction very fast in the next few years.

There is still another trail--I mean the back trail, letting things drift, trusting to luck, plunging on toward internationalism as sellers and trying at the same time to huddle behind nationalist barriers as buyers. Even this, probably the most painful trail of all, is worth mentioning, for thousands of our people vociferously yearn to head that way; and the number of such people is likely to increase rather than diminish, I am afraid, in the next few years.

Whether we are prepared at this time to engage in a genuinely scientific nationwide discussion of the tariff, as it affects agriculture and other elements in a long-time plan for the whole nation, I have little means of knowing; but I suspect that the desperateness of the situation has done a great deal to make realists of us all. And I have faith that we can arouse from the ranks of our democracy, in city and country alike, a leadership that will address itself to fundamentals, and not simply blow off in the empty and prejudiced emotional bombast which has characterized such discussions in the past.

I lean to the international solution. But it is no open-and-shut question. It needs study, and above all dispassionate discussion. I want to see the whole question examined by our people in a new spirit.





Seminar in Economics

Transcript from a seminar lecture given at the Iowa State College at Aims, October, 1935.

p. 96.

From the memorandum here before me I see that I am supposed to talk on some fundamental economic concepts. Inasmuch as I have not had time to clarify my own mind sufficiently on these concepts, I think I shall steal upon them in a rather roundabout way, and perhaps it will be just as interesting for you.

It is always interesting to inquire, I think, how we got the way we are. It is interesting to inquire just how economists get that way. And perhaps I might illuminate the subject in as painless a way as possible if, by way of introduction, I would go aver a few of my experiences with economics.

My first introduction to economics came by way of Professor B. H. Hibbard. I remember being asked in 1910, at the close of my college course, who had influenced me most, and I said Professor Hibbard. Later, of course, we came to disagree violently about the McNary-Haugen Bill and some other things; but I still think that Professor Hibbard is a very good teacher.

My first vivid impression with regard to economics came with the high hog prices in 1910. One of the animal-husbandry men suggested that there be held a seminar with regard to the high hog prices, and several seminars were held. I remember that Professor Hibbard suggested that the increased production of gold probably had something to do with the price level in the world, and that the high world price level in turn influenced hog prices. The animal-husbandry men told of a shortage of hogs due to cholera.

Another thing that happened in 1910 was that I attended the Graduate School at Ames, and met Professor W. J. Spillman and Professor George Warren of Cornell. These two young men were full of an almost Messianic complex about the farm-management approach. Previously we had been taught by what might be termed the Aristotelian method. You were to look into your own mind for a notion as to what was good farm management, and correct it by your boyhood memories. But Spillman and Warren thought that one should go out on the farm and get firsthand knowledge. They spoke with a great deal of vigor. Interestingly enough, Dr. Spillman is the philosophic father--insofar as it may be said to have a philosophic father--of the Agricultural Adjustment Act, and Warren is quite strongly opposed to it.

I found myself an a farm paper a year or two later writing about how splendid it was to raise hogs and what fine returns they brought to farmers. When I first wrote I had not noticed that hogs were down to six dollars a hundredweight. When the low prices came to my attention, I determined to discover just what it was that made hog prices.

I got to studying corn prices, and corn supply as well: I didn't know any method of discovering just how to measure the contribution of five or six different causative factors relative to one particular dependent factor.

I didn't know much about calculus. Eventually I ran across Henry L. Moore's <I>Economic Cycles, Their Laws and Cause</I>. I took that over to a professor of mathematics and he showed me how Professor Moore had derived his curves. So I adopted as my motto the phrase found on the flyleaf of Thompson's volume an calculus, "What one fool can do, another can." So I learned how to calculate correlation coefficients and came to have a very great respect for quantitative methods of economic analysis. For a time I thought all economists dealt too much with economic theory. Professor Pearson of Cornell happened to be out in Illinois, and we got close together in 1919. He had the same opinions as I about the superiority of facts over abstract reasoning. I think we egged each other on, and we compiled and analyzed a great quantity of statistics.

A little later I became very impatient with the school at Ames because it did not have a sufficiently strong statistical course. Professor Sarle and I spent some Saturdays going up to Ames, trying to enlighten their darkness. I am not at all sure but what it was the blind leading the blind. The only time I ever taught school was for ten Saturdays at Ames. My only students were the graduate students and professors. I was called a very bad teacher because I assumed too much knowledge on the part of the professors. At that time I really was thoroughly sold on the correlation method of analysis and assumed that everyone else should be.

I am mentioning these things merely because--well, probably for the same reason that Saint Paul used to tell the Jews how good a Jew he had been at one time. I merely want to say that I once believed in statistics. I do not know but what it is just as well far one to go through the experience. In like manner it is no doubt a good thing for every college student to become a Socialist at one time or another. It is possibly a good thing for every economist to become a statistician. But I hope that he does not impute to statistics mystical values.

On the other hand, I do not know how one can endure working with statistics without believing them to have mystical value. I really do not know just what ought to be done about it. Perhaps those of you who naturally have a taste for figures will work with statistics, and the others will give them the go-by and will be just as well off.

When I felt the shadow of the World War coming on, I started attending meetings of the American Economic Association, the annual meetings held at Christmas time, and became quite fascinated. A certain learned gentleman would rise to his feet -and engage in discussion. I thought it was something very delightful indeed. I imputed mystical values to that too, to which the discussion was not entitled. It was all very strange to me at that time.

One more thing. In 1913 I ran across Veblen's theory of the leisure class. I met him in 1918 and discovered that he too had been through a phase of the sort that I have described for myself, and that in 1891 he had prepared a study on wheat prices. I looked it up and found out for sure he had; but on reading Veblen's books I became convinced that the analyses of both the statisticians and the classical economists were rather beside the point. I still think Veblen one of the most stimulating of the economists, provided you can penetrate the protective coloration of his style. It is like Harding's style, which someone described as resembling an elephant wallowing in molasses, a very heavy, turgid style indeed. I think Isador Lubin over at the Labor Department said that Veblen's style was for purposes of protective coloration, so that he would not get fired too often. Yet at the heart, Veblen's message seems to me to be decidedly worthwhile, and an excellent antidote if one tends to take the classical analysts too seriously.

It seems to me that the classical economists reason too nearly in a vacuum. They seem to assume no direction coming from any source. Veblen assumes that there are certain forces moving darkly in the background of the market place. And I think anyone who spends any time in Washington, in times like these at least, is sure that there are certain forces in the background of the market place.

Suppose I sum up my attitude concerning economics as it exists by saying that, in my opinion, economics is for the most part just pure machinery. Now, that is not doing economists a justice. It is doing them an injustice. I have found again and again that mast of the economists I have known in Washington are truly extraordinary individuals, with a practical and developed sense of balance between classes which enables them to work out the practical solution of a given problem in a truly remarkable fashion. They would not be able to discern as accurately the justice of a particular situation if they had not been trained so carefully; first, by the careful logic of classical analysis, and, second, by the punishment of continual reference to detailed figures which are necessary in statistical analysis.

Those two approaches which supplement each other admirably, provided they are applied by a man with ordinarily well-balanced brain, bring to pass an individual who is powerfully equipped to be of extraordinary service in Washington. Compared with some of the men in the Department, I have at times found myself a neophyte indeed, being pushed in a particular direction by pressure given me by men supplied with certain statistical data, and saved just in time by one or the other of these economists, concerning whom I am on the point of indicating shortcomings. Before I do that, however, I wish to express to these economists an unusual and deep sense of gratitude, and I am sure that administrative officials in the Department generally and in the Triple-A particularly will agree with me.

It seems to me that economics of necessity must serve some deeper end in human life; and as we endeavor along this line, we will discover that the economic mechanism with which we are now equipped is a mechanism that is rather imperfect with respect to serving the true ends of human life. The economic mechanism which we now have has of necessity been built up out of ideas which we, in the United States especially, have had and that the capitalist economy has had during the past fifty years--or we might say 300 years, for that matter.

Going back 300 years, we can trace it in some measure to the Protestant Reformation which let loose forces of individualism in a way which was rather new in this world. The religious world was the focus of important decisions back in the 1300's and 1400's, and when the point was made that you did not need to go through the priestly hierarchy but were able to go to God direct--when that attitude began to influence millions of people, then individualistic forces were let loose which were very quickly appropriated by the incipient capitalistic enterprises and capitalism was launched "in a big way." That was reinforced promptly by the discovery of America; and the very heart and soul of that approach was exemplified in American surroundings because the very soul of Protestantism could express itself best under pioneer conditions. There is the discipline of daily life, of rising at a certain time. Seven-eights of the people still rise at a certain hour; and half of them still get up at the same time on Sunday because they have the habit, though the Protestant tradition seems to be fading into the background as regards Sunday rising. But the Protestant discipline, the regimentation of the individual life according to the individual's soul, the discipline of saving, of thrift and frugality, resulted in the accumulation of capital supplies; and then of course you come along to the early part of the nineteenth century and have the Darwinian doctrine of evolution and Herbert Spencer's doctrine of the survival of the fittest, which was slightly different. And then in the economic world you have the whole <I>laissez-faire</I> doctrine, the Manchester school; and you have all these ideas being developed by various professors and filtered down to the graduates, and continually being worshiped by businessmen; and many of the economic graduates of the colleges becoming the hired men of big business and getting thereby the best salaries--some of them preparing monthly economic letters; and then individual Protestants, now seeking to enrich themselves as rapidly as possible through the stock market, reading these letters with avidity and finding on every occasion their disappointments hooked up with governmental action.

We found then, as in the decade of the twenties, something completely just in the whole setup of classical economics as promulgated by the high priests of that decade. Now that faith is in a considerable measure destroyed. I say "considerable measure," but it is still held by a great many economists, maybe half. Perhaps most economists still hold to it, also businessmen. If you want to work for the New York bankers, continue to perfect yourself in the doctrine of the decade of the twenties. Make yourselves high-priced valuable commodities. I am not altogether sure that these gentlemen who lurk darkly in the background of the market place in the long run will count so much after all. As a matter of fact, I am not really so sure they counted so much in the decade of the twenties.

This is not to say that the law of supply and demand is untrue. Of course it is very definitely true. I am one of the strongest worshipers of the law of supply and demand that there is anywhere. It works like the law of gravitation. But like the law of gravitation its action can be delayed by certain forces.

I think we are coming--by fits and starts of course--to a time when there is to be infinitely more co-operation than we had in the past, when the law of the jungle does not prevail to the same extent as it did in 1929. I think the New Deal faintly foreshadows certain ultimates in that direction.

As to what the economic laws are for a co-operative commonwealth as distinct from a competitive commonwealth, none of us knows so very well. In the competitive commonwealth where you have prices freely moving, in response to supply and demand, day after day in the market place, you could in the old days, by studying the price array, make yourself into a pretty fair price analyst and price prognosticator, unless something unusual came in to upset the situation.

Therefore in the old days training of this sort was peculiarly useful; but if we are going to come into a co-operative situation, the function of planning plays a more important part. You begin to think more in terms of synthesis.

M. L. Wilson, the Assistant Secretary, in March of this year, [1935], started the Land Grant College people to making a physical survey, in each of the forty-eight states, as to how they would have their acreages in the different crops changed from the standpoint of bringing to pass the greatest conservation of soil fertility and also the best farm management, leaving out altogether the question of price.

The work was started last spring. In August and September we held four regional conferences to assemble the data, first by regions and then by the country as a whole. In our various contacts, with the college people, we learned that they found it easy to think in terms of analysis but they did not function at all well in terms of synthesis. They had no practice. There has been little opportunity for planners in this country. There is, generally speaking, no such thing as planning economists.

In the physical world we find planners. People have had experience in city planning. But even where planning is accepted, there the, synthetic approach is very rarely to be found. In economics it is scarcely to be found at all.

If it were to be found, how could you account for that most extraordinary tragedy of the United States moving so slowly after the World War to act as a creditor nation must act. A few men saw in 1920 what it meant for us to be a creditor nation, but most of the economists placed no emphasis on this all-important fact. I wish I knew the inside working of the State Department, to know whether or not the State Department saw the perils of our change from a debtor to a creditor nation. Did the State Department bring to the attention of the presidents of that day the necessity of adjusting our tariff schedules to the fact that we were a creditor nation?

You would feel that economists would have had a sense of duty that would have made them hammer away at the fact until the situation had been taken care of. But economists are not synthesists. Their greatest joy comes in getting into a cat-and-dog fight. At the economic meetings a certain learned gentleman gives a paper and the next gentleman makes it a point of honor to disagree. There is no constructive solution. They seem to feel that it is a kind of chess game. That may be all right as far as the rank and file of economists are concerned, but it does seem that economists associated with the government should be all the time thinking of what is the constructive outcome for the nation. And I would trust that before this series of meetings is over, you would have some kind of committee which would submit for you something in the nature of a constructive plan--one hypothesis that the Liberty League would approve of; another hypothesis that would delight the hearts of economists; another hypothesis for the New Dealers; another for the Jeffersonian Democrats; and so on. They would have some things in common.

Now I would say in conclusion this: that I am convinced that behind economics, behind the economic machinery, there are certain truths in the field of philosophy-and behind philosophy, in the field of religion--which have to do with the direction of the activities of man; and that these are more important at this stage of the game than economics itself. Unfortunately, because of their nature, it is impossible to evolve a body of facts which can be subjected to critical analysis in this particular field. We are such children in the field of philosophy and religion and so uneasy when in it! But it is in this field that ultimate directions lie. Without unity of purpose about ultimate directions, the economic machinery cannot be properly oriented. That would be the subject for a further talk. While I could have arrived at this point earlier, my own mind is in such a nebulous state about it that I rather deliberately left it until this moment.

To talk in terms of philosophy and religion might make many of you rather impatient. The religious field at certain times has been of real concern and interest, but it is not now of genuine interest to one person in a thousand. Under many circumstances we hate to use the word "religion" because it has been so misused. By "religion" I do not refer necessarily to the church. Businessmen have a religion, something they give their whole hearts to. It seems to me there must be again a profound interest in the very largest significances, to which must be referred the economic machinery. I have not thought through that situation carefully, but I just feel that economics by itself, without orientation, is mere machinery. By using economic machinery skillfully you can go in this direction and in that, but when it comes to determining directions, you get into the field of philosophy and religion. Unfortunately, the most intelligent young men felt that they were satisfying their ego best by getting away from these fields into the world of business. Because very little prestige is given to philosophy and religion, there has not been a sufficiently critical analysis of these fields. Most of us are neophytes in these lines. I know I am. I feel, however, that in some manner we must have a much more powerful sense of direction.




Pigs and Pig Iron

A speech delivered November 12, 1935.

p. 103.

People are still interested in the six million pigs that were killed in September of 1933. In letters I have received following these radio talks, the pigs are mentioned more often than any one thing except potatoes. One letter says:

"It just makes me sick all over when I think how the government has killed millions and millions of little pigs, and how that has raised pork prices until today we poor people cannot even look at a piece of bacon:"

It is common belief that pork is high today because the little pigs were killed in 1933. As a matter of fact, there is more pork now and the price is lower because these pigs were killed two years ago. Let me tell the story:

For eighteen months before August, 1933, farmers had been selling hogs for an average of $3.42 a hundredweight. Such a price was ruinous to farmers. The average hog grower suffered from low hog prices during this period one thousand times more than the average consumer has suffered from high hog prices during the past few months. Hog prices in August of 1933 were intolerably low, and the northwestern Corn Belt was suffering from drought. There was every reason to expect prices to continue low because there had been an increase in the spring pig crop, and because the foreign market, which formerly had absorbed the product of as many as twelve million hogs from this country, had largely disappeared because of tariffs and quotas.

So six million little pigs were killed in September of 1933. They were turned into one hundred million pounds of pork. That pork was distributed for relief. It went to feed the hungry. Some very small pigs could not be handled as meat by the packers. These were turned into grease and tankage for fertilizer.

If those six million pigs had grown up they would have been marketed in January, February, and March of 1934. They probably would have brought around $2.50 a hundredweight. Instead of that the price of hogs at that time averaged $3.60. In January, February, and March of 1934, the consumers of the United States, in spite of the absence of the little pigs which would have come to market at that time, had their customary quantity of pork. Hogs at $3.60 made it possible for farmers to buy more city products and so put more city people back to work.

If those little pigs had grown up to normal weight they would have eaten about seventy-five million bushels of corn. The pork made out of these seventy-five million bushels of corn would have been consumed by August, 1934. But because of the emergency pig marketing program those seventy-five million bushels of corn were not eaten in early 1934. You remember that in 1934 we had the most terrible drought in our history. The corn crop was a billion bushels short. In that situation we had on hand those seventy-five million bushels of corn produced the year before, and that corn was used to make pork in late 1934 and early 1935. It gave us more pork this year than we would have had without it. Had it been fed in early 1934 the oversupply of pork would have been terrific then and the price would have been $2.50 a hundredweight instead of $3.60. But this year there would have been even fewer hogs and even higher prices than we have had.

As long as we have our program of Agricultural Adjustment we shall never again need to slaughter little pigs to keep hog prices from going to zero. We have the machinery to furnish, consumers a normal, balanced supply.

I suppose it is a marvelous tribute to the humanitarian instincts of the American people that they sympathize more with little pigs which are killed than with full-grown hogs. Some people may object to killing pigs at any age. Perhaps they think that farmers should run a sort of old-folks home for hogs and keep them around indefinitely as barnyard pets. But we have to think about farmers as well as hogs. And we must think about consumers and try to get a uniform supply of pork from year to year at a price which is fair to farmer and consumer alike.

The drought of 1934, which cut the supply of feed grain by twice as much as any previous drought, is chiefly responsible for high pork prices today. The laughter of little pigs in 1933 gave us more pork and lower prices this year than we would have had if they had been allowed to live and eat those seventy-five million bushels of corn. Those who hold to the contrary are misinformed.

Beef prices are high now because of the same drought. We have never had an A.A.A. production-control program in beef. Thousands of cattle were on the point of starvation in the West in 1934. Should we have allowed them to starve? Because we had the machinery of the Agricultural Adjustment Administration, we were able to step in promptly, buy those cattle, slaughter them and can them. The government has thus been able to distribute hundreds of millions of pounds of meat for relief that would otherwise have been wasted.

Strange to say, I find myself in strong sympathy with the attitude of many folks who held up their hands in horror about the killing of little pigs. I will go further than most of them in condemning scarcity economics. We want an economy of abundance, but it must be balanced abundance of those things we really want. The pig-iron reduction control of the big steel companies in 1933 was in principle one thousand times as damnable as the pig-reduction campaign of 1933. Pig-iron production in 1932 was about twenty percent of that in 1933. Pig production in 1933 in pounds was ninety-seven percent of that of 1929. In 1934 pig-iron production was forty-five percent of that of 1929. Pig production in 1934, the drought year, was eighty percent of that of 1929. In other words, farmers cut pig production three percent when steel companies cut pig-iron production eighty percent. That sort of industrial reduction program plowed millions of workers out into the streets. It is because of that industrial reduction program that we have to spend billions for relief to keep the plowed-out workers from starvation. I hope industry in future reduction programs will not find it desirable to plow millions of workers out of their jobs. People are more important than pigs.

Great corporations should not finance people to attack Agricultural Adjustment. They are too vulnerable. Instead they should co-operate with agriculture to bring about increased, balanced production of those things which the American people really want at a price which they can afford to pay, but at a price high enough to keep the production coming without undue speculative gain. If industry were as productive as it knows how to be, the increased home market for fruit, vegetables, meat, and dairy products would be truly surprising. But this market cannot come to pass until industry ceases its reduction control program.

My attention has been called to a statement by a minister out in the Corn Belt before the district conference of his faith. Concerning the actions of the New Deal he says: ". . . some of them are downright sinful as the destruction of foodstuffs in the face of present want."

I have been used to statements of this sort by partisans, demagogues, politicians, and even newspaper columnists. To men of this sort I pay no attention, because I know that their interest in a cause makes it impossible for them to distinguish truth from falsehood. But when a minister of the gospel makes a statement, we expect it to be the truth. Just what food does he think this administration has destroyed? We would like to know the specific instances. If he is merely referring to acreage control which enabled us to keep out of use in 1935 some thirty million of the fifty million acres which have produced in the past for markets in foreign countries, I would say, "Yes we are guilty of acreage control and, depending on variations in weather, we shall continue to be until foreign purchasing power is restored by the breaking down of tariff and quota barriers."

We have not destroyed foodstuffs. We do not contemplate destroying them. However, foodstuffs <I>were </I>destroyed back in 1932 by farmers who found it profitable to burn their corn for fuel rather than to sell it for ten cents a bushel (which amounted to $3.33 a ton). It was cheaper for many farmers in the northwest Corn Belt to burn food for fuel at those pitiful prices than to burn coal.

People who believe that we ordered the destruction of food are merely the victims of their prejudices and the misinformation that has been fed to them by interested persons. What we actually did was to stop the destruction of foodstuffs by making it worth while for farmers to sell them rather than to destroy them.

Agricultural Adjustment of the past two years has been a million times as warranted as the industrial reduction policy of the past five years. Why does not the minister attack the industrial reduction which was made possible by corporate and tariff laws? It was this reduction by industry that created the unemployment and destroyed the farmers' markets. Might it not be better for all of us to do what is possible to build up on the part of both agriculture and industry a situation which will result in greatly increased balanced output of those things which we really want?



Soil and the General Welfare

Chapter VIII of Wallace's Whose Constitution?, Reynal & Hitchcock, 1936.

p. 111.

Of all the circumstances which have combined to make this nation different from the nations of the Old World, rich soil and plenty of it, free or nearly so to all comers, stands first. Freeholders in a wide land of fabulous fertility, guarded by great oceans from foreign invasion, could erect separate strongholds of individual enterprise, free speech and free conscience. In no spread-eagle sense, but in plain truth, liberty and equality have been a natural outgrowth of our great gift of soil.

But the dynamic quality which characterizes civilized man does not leave such a gift unmodified. If nature was prodigal with us, we have been ten times more prodigal with her. During the past 150 years, we white men have destroyed more soil, timber and wild-life than the Indians, left to themselves, would have destroyed in many thousands of years.

It is easy to excuse the farmers of one hundred years ago for the way in which they mismanaged their farms. In the first place most of them didn't know there was such a thing as soil erosion. There was available very little scientific knowledge about methods of soil building or of avoiding soil depletion. In the second place, in a land so vast and with a population so thin, the easiest course oftentimes was to wear out a farm and then move on west. No one worries about conserving the air. Why should anyone give a thought to saving the land when there is plenty of it?

On the basis of their record it would be easy to indict the people of the United States as killers, looters and exploiters. Several species of wild life have completely disappeared, others have been greatly reduced, and fish cannot live in many of our streams because of pollution. We have wastefully slashed down our forests and have exploited our oil and mineral resources. Pastures and hillsides have been plowed. But in all of this I am convinced that the American people were thoughtless rather than willfully destructive. They were victims of the customs of the immediate past, when the important thing was to fill up a continent with people as rapidly as possible, even though the result might be exploitation rather than conservation.

Today we have come to a time when the continuation of the exploitive frame of mind can easily be disastrous. Already we have allowed erosion by water to destroy more than fifty million acres, representing an area equal to all of the arable land in New York and Pennsylvania. Another fifty million acres have been damaged almost to the point of ruination for productive use, and an additional zoo million acres have been seriously impoverished. The process of erosion is rapidly gaining headway on still another 100 million acres, some of it the most valuable farm land remaining in the United States. Wind erosion has nearly ruined four million acres and is active on about sixty million acres; largely in the High Plain regions. People who have not studied the results of investigations made at soil erosion experiment stations in central and western United States cannot appreciate how terribly real is soil erosion. At these stations arrangements are made for carefully weighing the soil which is removed from the land by the rain under different systems of cropping. On many slopes, one exceedingly hat in will remove as much as an inch of soil from land in corn or in cotton.

Nearly half of our land is farmed by tenants who stay on the average only two or three years on the same farm and whose chief concern is getting together enough money to pay the rent this particular year. The landlords, on the other hand, are driven by the necessity of getting enough money out of the land to pay the taxes and interest on the mortgage and they oftentimes have only slightly more interest in the land than the tenants. In other words, it would seem that on at least a million farms the landlords and tenants are forced by their economic situation to enter into a conspiracy which in effect promotes erosion rather than prevents it.

People in cities may forget the soil for as long as, a hundred years; but mother nature's memory is long and she will not let them forget indefinitely. The soil is the mother of man and if we forget her, life eventually weakens.

When the cotton gin came into extensive use there began in the South an expansion of the cotton crop which resulted in the destruction of millions of acres of plow land in southeastern United States. When machinery was invented for the more rapid plowing, disking and cultivating of corn land, the farmers in parts of the Middle West entered upon a period of promoting soil erosion which put the farmers of the Southeast to shame as mere beginners in the art of soil exploitation. At the time of the World War tractors and combines came into the picture. Millions of acres of pasture were plowed. In the humid parts of the grain belt the sloping fields became greatly subject to erosion, and in the drier parts wind erosion became a serious problem, especially during March and April of the drier years. Drainage became an obsession, at the same time that the grass was plowed. Rivers were straightened, and the spring and summer rains were sent to the sea with the greatest possible speed. Lake levels and water tables dropped. Underground water reserves declined to a point which made it almost impossible to obtain well water in many farm areas when the dry seasons came along.

If the climate shifts to the dry side, dust storms, failing wells and lack of subsoil moisture will become an exceedingly serious problem in many areas. If the climate shifts to the wet side, the excess of drainage will not prove at all embarrassing but the planting of too much land in crops will result in sending the surface soil either to silt up the streams or to move on to the ocean. 

Yes, the white man is learning that in a land with a continental climate of high winds and sudden dashing rains and rather violent extremes of weather from one year to the next, it is the part of wisdom to leave a higher percentage of the land in grass and trees than has, been, the custom in the United States so far.

The floods of March, 1936, made millions of city people conscious of the need for better management of the headwaters of our great rivers. Part of the problem is the erection of dams, reservoirs and levees; part of it is reforestation; and another important part is the holding of the soil in place on individual farms, In fact, engineering structures without simultaneous corrective action taken by the owners of land in the watershed maybe made useless in a relatively short time because of the filling up of reservoirs through deposit of silt.

The life of a flourishing civilization demands recognition by landowners and the national government of the necessity of co-operating in behalf of the general welfare to prevent soil erosion and floods. This problem runs across state lines.

We may well take a lesson from northwestern China and Asia Minor. It took several hundred years for the people of these lands to reduce them to deserts. We in the United States are moving faster because we have the advantage of machinery. Thus far the damage has not been completely ruinous, but in another thirty or forty years we may do irreparable harm.

Probably the most damaging indictment that can be made of the capitalistic system is the way in which its emphasis on unfettered individualism results in exploitation of natural resources in a manner to destroy the physical foundations of national longevity. Is there no way for the capitalistic system to develop a mechanism for taking thought and planning action in terms of the general welfare for the long run as represented by the conservation of soil and other natural resources which are being competitively exploited?

The experience of Sweden would seem to suggest that excessive exploitation can be avoided, if the competitive spirit is restrained by reasonable regulatory laws and if the nation does a certain amount of national planning for the general welfare. Sweden has long led the world in the care and maintenance of its forest resources, and more recently has pursued an enlightened policy with respect to other natural resources, such as mines and water-power. Its forest laws require that all industries and persons engaged in timber cutting must replace the timber removed within a reasonable length of time and that no forest lands be left bare or unplanted with good new stock. In the case of, mining industries, Sweden requires that private companies look to the long-time welfare of the people dependent on these industries by, establishing welfare funds which can take care of workers and their families after the mines have been exhausted in any given locality. Sweden's efforts prove that a nation's natural resources may be used with, regard to the long-time general welfare, rather than exploited merely for temporary profits. The United States is many years behind Sweden in this respect and might well profit from its example.

So far as soil resources are concerned, however, the problem is related to the business cycle and to unemployment in the cities as well as to practices of farming in themselves. For example, between 1930 and 1934 about two million young people were raised on the farm who normally would have gone to the cities but who stayed at home to go into the farming business. Largely as a result of these two million young people backed up on the farm, five hundred thousand new farms came into existence between 1930 and 1935. Many of these new farms are on hilly land and poor soil. The young people are certain to eke out a miserable existence on this poor land and the land is certain to be harmed.

Thus the soil problem is urban as well as rural. If city industry were to proceed at its normal rate of activity, it could absorb the excess young people from the farms and put them to work doing things much more profitable far the general welfare of the United States than the cultivation of land which ought to be in grass and trees. Nevertheless, I am convinced it, is better for the young people of the farms to eke out a miserable existence on poor soil than to come to the cities to burden the relief rolls or sit around in idleness.

But it is not only the desperate farming of poverty-stricken individuals, burdened by the necessity of selling crops at low prices to pay rents, taxes or mortgages, that destroys the land. Large scale lumbermen, cattle-men and grain farmers are almost equally responsible. Big men as well as little men are soil destroyers. Sometimes the local or state taxation policy forces exploitation, especially in timber. Yes, we are all of us guilty in one way or another of neglecting the soil or fostering its exploitation in a manner which may prove to be exceedingly embarrassing for our children and grandchildren. Should regulatory methods be adopted? In some cases, yes, but in other cases it may be necessary to offer financial incentive to induce individuals to act in the public interest.

Under the Agricultural Adjustment Administration there were financial incentives for shifting millions of acres of farm land producing crops no longer needed (crops which were hard on the soil) into soil-enriching legumes and sail-binding grasses. The new Conservation and Allotment Act, we believe, will promote such shifts on an even , broader and more permanent basis. Under the Soil Conservation Service needed experiments are being carried out and technical aid and services given to help farmers in 41 States to prevent erosion and remedy soil wastage on 141 damaged watershed areas. The Resettlement Administration is making readjustments of the use of land too poor for farming and helping families to find better land or occupation. The Tennessee Valley Authority is trying to control erosion and bad land practices in the entire watershed of the Tennessee River which embraces parts of seven States. These various programs are steps in the direction of wiser use and protection of our resources. But all of these efforts will be inadequate until we solve the problem of farm tenancy and the problem of unemployment, the twin problems of human erosion which strike so deeply into the heart of our national life. It is no mere figure of speech to say that we will not get rid of soil erosion until we also get rid of human erosion. . . .


Technology, Corporations and the General Welfare

A series of three lectures delivered at the University of North Carolina and published in pamphlet form as <I>Technology, Corporations and the General Welfare</I>.

p. 119.

The biggest single fact in the modern world of economics is the recent growth of technology. Ever since the beginning of the nineteenth century, when new textile machines were introduced into England, when mill workers began to see that their jobs were insecure, and landowners and sheep growers sought protection against the threatening advance of cotton, the impacts of technological change have periodically baffled economists and statesmen. The early battles against the rise of the machine were battles against the inevitable. Today we readily accept the benefits, of technology but find ourselves incapable of grappling effectively with the trail of economic insecurity and waste of human and natural resources.

The forward march of technology in industry is well known. Not so many people realize that technological change has come with equal speed on the farm.

I well remember my astonishment some twenty-seven years ago, when taking a walking trip across Iowa, in discovering from the farmers themselves that the countryside had been to some extent depopulated during the previous thirty years. They told me how there used to be forty children at their country school, whereas at that time there were only ten. The farmers of Iowa in 1910 were producing more than in 1880, but there were fewer of them. Many of the farmers in 1910 felt that the tremendous changes which they had seen take place were about to come to an end. They were satisfied with the binder and the two-horse cultivator and the gang-plow, and had no desire to look forward to the tractor, the combine, and the two-row cultivator.

And now today, in the year 1937, we look back sixty years to the time when it took twenty-five hours of man labor to produce twenty bushels of wheat, as compared with ten hours today. Eighty hours of man labor would produce forty bushels of corn in 1880, while today only forty hours are needed. In the cotton belt in 1880, a bale of cotton required about three hundred hours of man labor as compared with a little over two hundred hours today. New machinery and new methods have not been quite so helpful in improving the efficiency of the corn and cotton farmer as they have been in improving the efficiency of the wheat farmer, but everywhere the influence has been felt.

During the first hundred years of our national existence the efficiency of the average farmer was increased about fivefold. During the past fifty years the average farmer has about doubled his efficiency.

Looking ahead fifty years, we know that it is possible again to double the efficiency of the average farmer. We cannot be certain of this, however, because there is no assurance as yet about the city unemployment problem. If unemployed people are forced back on the land, the efficiency of the average farmer will be tremendously cut down. Technologically it is possible that in the year 1987, when Philadelphia holds her bicentennial celebration of the signing of the Constitution, the average farmer will be producing twice as much as today and twenty times as much as the farmer of 1787. In 1787 it required nineteen people living on the land to support one person in town. Today nineteen people on the land support fifty-six people in the towns and cities of the United States, as well as from five to ten in foreign countries.

Looking toward the future, I can conceive of conditions under which agricultural efficiency per farmer would not increase. A combination of insect pests, diseases, drought, flood, declining soil fertility, and unemployed people from the city going back on the land might produce a condition under which the agricultural output per farmer in 1950 would be actually less than today. I think it much more likely, however, that the weather during the next fifty years will be about the same as it has in the past fifty, although the fluctuations from one extreme to the other may be somewhat more violent. Furthermore, I believe that the Federal and State governments will continue to support research looking toward the control of insect pests, diseases, and soil erosion, and that eventually the intelligence of man will triumph splendidly in all of these fields of activity. Solving the unemployment problem in the cities is more difficult than taking care of insect pests, diseases, and soil erosion; but I would anticipate, if proper measures are adopted, that even this problem ten years hence would not be quite so bothersome as it is today.

Offsetting the forces that work toward reduced efficiency per farmer, there are powerful forces on the side of increased efficiency. Take the corn-hog situation, with which I am intimately familiar by reason of personal experience. I am certain that five or six years from now, if the weather is normal, the yield of corn in the corn belt will be at least 200 million bushels greater than would otherwise be the case on the same land, merely as a result of the widespread planting of hybrid seed. It is now definitely known, as the result of thousands of tests, that on the better land in the corn belt, adapted hybrids one year with another will outyield the old-fashioned corn by at least ten bushels an acre. At the same time, better rotations and more labor-saving machinery are being used. Within twenty years the improved rotations should increase yields on that part of the corn belt which is properly handled at least five bushels an acre.

With equally good weather, it should be possible thirty years hence to produce the necessary corn in the corn belt with about half as much land and labor as was required during the decade of the twenties. We will not need as many bushels of corn in the future as in the past because of the improvement which we shall make in the efficiency of our livestock and the improvement in our methods of feeding. It will be a long time before we improve the efficiency of our beef cattle so very much, but within thirty years we should have strains of hogs which will produce a hundred pounds of gain for seventy-five pounds less feed than required today, a reduction of nearly a fifth.

Since the World War we have learned to produce about forty percent more milk with an increase of only fifteen percent in dairy cow numbers. We have increased our pork and lard production eighteen percent with nine percent fewer hogs. Our chickens today have the capacity to turn one hundred pounds of feed into more eggs than could the chickens of twenty years ago. Thus far the greatly improved animal efficiency is largely the result of better methods of feeding and sanitation, but better breeding from now on will count for more and more, especially in chickens, dairy cows, and hogs. Inasmuch as eighty percent of our corn is fed to livestock, it would seem to be possible thirty years hence to avoid plowing all land subject to erosion, and to put into corn only such a percentage of the land as will result in maintaining the soil fertility of the corn belt at a higher level indefinitely.

The cotton belt faces about the same prospects in technological progress as does the corn belt. In the future it may easily be that three-fourths of the agricultural products entering commerce will be produced by one-third of the farmers. It is equally possible that the other two-thirds of the farmers, producing only one-fourth of the commercial agricultural output, will be producing three-fourths of the children which will supply the next generation. As methods now stand, these children will be raised and trained under miserable conditions. One of the most difficult things about the unequal application of the benefits of modern culture and education is the effect it has of exaggerating the differences between man and man. My guess is that the genetic or inborn differences between farmers are exaggerated perhaps tenfold by the differences that are derived from the training, education, proper food, and the possibility of getting a little capital as a send-off.

The children of the farmers at the bottom of the pile are usually poorly educated and poorly fed, and more than half of them drift to town to work in the factory. Here, because of poor education, they are subject to exploitation of many kinds and easily fall for modern variations of the old rabble-rousing cry, "Bread and circuses." Both State and Federal governments may well ask what their proper duties toward the poorer farmers are, and especially toward the education of their children. Agricultural technology with all its boasted glories, realized and to come, sharpens this problem and makes it even more acute.

On the whole, it seems clear that in industry as in agriculture a rather high percentage of the benefits of increased productivity, resulting from new inventions and new methods, goes to the people who are already better off. Organized labor tends to benefit more than unorganized labor, and the well-to-do farmers benefit more than the poor farmers. Corporations, and especially large corporations, tend on the whole to benefit more than the small corporations and individual businessmen. There are plenty of exceptions, but on the whole technology exalts the dominance of those already on top and makes more hopeless the position of those at the bottom of the pile. Unfortunately, the landless, the homeless, and the unemployed have nearly twice as many children as are necessary to replace themselves; therefore, the problem seems to grow as the machine becomes more triumphant.

There is nothing inevitable about this situation. It is possible to make the machine the servant of man and not the master. But it is going to be necessary sooner or later to change many of the governmental rules of the game as they apply to agriculture, to labor, to industry, to our natural resources, and to the distribution of our national income. All civilizations have had to face this problem in one form or another as they approached maturity, but no nation has ever had to face it in such a sharply focused form as the United States, because no nation has ever had such a powerful technology accentuating the differences in power and income between those at the top of the pile and those at the bottom. <P><center><big>* * *</big></center>

Beginning in a big way seventy years ago, corporations have more and more dominated the business and political world.

Today, everyone lives in the sunlight or the shadow of corporations. More than ninety percent of the workers in manufacturing, transportation and mining work for corporations. For a long time the family-sized retailing establishment resisted the chain store and the mail-order house remarkably well, but in the last fifteen years the retreat of the small businessman before his big corporate competitor has been almost continuous. More than ninety percent of agriculture is still conducted by family-sized units, but even here the trend of technological development is bound to give the corporate form of organization many of the advantages it must have in order to compete successfully with cheap family labor.

The proportion of total assets controlled by the two hundred biggest corporations of the country is constantly increasing. It seems probable, assuming a continuation of the conditions of the past fifteen years, that by 1950 the 200 largest corporations then will own seventy percent of all corporate wealth.

Thus far, the people of the United States on the whole have been rather friendly to corporations, just as they have been friendly to labor unions and farm organizations. But from now on it would seem that the general public will become more and more critical of special grants of Federal or State power to particular groups. It is not enough that in the past the great corporations should have furnished most of the people of the United States with automobiles, telephones, electric lights, and radios.

I am not one of those who cares to raise prejudice against corporations. It is a mistake to condemn all corporations as ruthless monsters seeking to plunder defenseless competitors and gouge the public. The directors of great corporations are usually earnest gentlemen, well versed in the rules of the competitive profit game and oftentimes unusually skilled in the management and technology of their particular enterprise.

It seems to me that very few of us can criticize the corporation directors for lack of knowledge of their particular business, but we can criticize many of them for having very little knowledge about the relationship of their business to the general welfare over a period of years. True it is that many of the big corporations have shown a splendid attitude with respect to their labor and with respect to the charities in the cities where they are located. Individually they have done wonders in building up-to-date factories to expand production, but collectively they have not yet learned the secret of expanding consumer purchasing power as rapidly as production. Corporations, until they have learned how to co-operate together or with the government to keep consumption in step with balanced expansion in production, will be one of the dominating factors in causing the alternating period of boom and depression.

Previous to 1929, very few people felt that corporations had even a partial responsibility for booms and depressions. But now we know that corporation policies having to do with production, employment, prices, and savings are dominating factors in the business cycle. True it is that the individual corporation is almost powerless to do anything about it, aside from displaying ordinary common sense and decency. It seems to me, however, that the directors of the great corporations might show a more enlightened attitude toward the government in its efforts to see that corporate management does not produce such wide fluctuations in production, employment, savings and profits. It seems to me that corporations must more and more be prepared to accept the doctrine that capital and management have received from government a grant of power which entitles them to make profits on condition that certain rules of the game are observed with respect to production, prices, wages, and savings.

Both the Federal government and the corporations are rather inexperienced in thinking about this kind of thing, because it was not until 1931 that anyone realized what extraordinary power big corporations have over production and prices.

To nearly everyone, the big corporations have been in a position to say, "Take it or leave it," and the public had to take it even when it meant millions of men walking the streets, even when it meant thirty-cent wheat, even when it meant prices for manufactured products which had been cut very little.

In some ways the situation with the big corporations today. is like it used to be with respect to individual banks and the central bank. In the old-fashioned bank panic the individual banks invariably did the things which made the panic worse. In the mad scramble of suddenly called loans and rapidly withdrawn deposits, everyone got hurt. In the banking world we have learned enough so that the central banking policies of the Federal Reserve System enable us to avoid the barbarism of the old-fashioned bank panic. We learned that central banking principles in certain respects had to be almost exactly the reverse of local banking principles--that in time of stress the central banks must be liberal and in time of prosperity hardboiled. In the field of corporate organization the ingenuity of man has not yet developed a central clearinghouse for increased balanced production. If such a central clearinghouse were developed I am convinced the principles governing it would be as different from the principles governing a particular corporation as the principles of a central bank differ from those governing a local bank.

The relation of the big corporations to the general welfare is an even more complicated problem than the relation of local banks to central banking policy. There must be the most careful study, therefore, in every field of industry, of price, wage and production policies, and relationships between these policies in one industry and the policies in another industry.

It would be a fine thing if businessmen representing all of the heavy industries could get together and survey the business outlook not only for the ensuing year but also for the ensuing three or four years. They might say, for example, "This building boom is coming on fine now, but it can't go on this way indefinitely. What is going to happen to us when it breaks? Can we co-operate with the government to prevent it from getting out of hand? Can we co-operate with the government to be sure that the government has a sufficient volume of public works and subsidized housing to take care of the situation when the boom finally does break? Are there interrelated industries which could; under some appropriate assurance against loss, undertake a program of production over a period of years so as to contribute to stability of employment?" Or representatives of the heavy producers' goods industries might perhaps meet with the representatives of the consumers' goods industries and survey the outlook for the ensuing year. They might say in this conference, for example, "The activity in heavy producers' goods is now climbing up faster than the activity in consumers' goods. This cannot be sustained for more than a year or so without a break. We believe the unusual activity can be sustained, however, if consumers' goods are stimulated. To do this means the adoption of policies which increase consumers' buying power. We therefore recommend to the government so and so and so and so."

Businessmen with the individualistic attitude they have had in the past will undoubtedly be slow in starting anything of this sort. But it is to be hoped that they are not too slow, because one of these days another 1929 will be upon us and in the haste and flurry of a moment like that it is difficult to act sensibly.

Corporations in their policies are not alone in their neglect of the general welfare. Organized labor and organized agriculture, insofar as they have the power, act in a somewhat similar way. Labor tries to get higher wages per hour and to make higher wages more certain by cutting the hours of work per week. In like manner farmers want higher prices per bushel, backed up if need be by production control. Obviously, if the price, wage and production policies of all three groups are completely successful the result will be to give everyone more and more money and less and less goods. Modern technology means increased production, but the rate of increase is undoubtedly being held down by these organized pressure groups which are striving for profits and wages and not for increased output of goods. The organized groups, having no suitable machinery to enable them to co-operate for their mutual welfare, fight each other and promote the general "ill-fare."

When we think and act solely in terms of wages per hour or prices per unit, superficially there seems to be conflict among the interests of farmers, laborers, and business, for higher prices and profit per unit for one group seem to mean higher costs and reduced standard of living for the others. This conflict is unnecessary. It arises from an overemphasis upon prices alone, and from a failure to realize that each individual's income depends not only on how much he makes per unit, but also upon how many units he sells. Sometimes the biggest gains can come from lower prices per unit, together with an increased volume sold. Such gains can be realized, however, only with a wise balancing of production, so as to get most of the increases in those products, such as housing and industrial products generally, where human wants and needs are least well satisfied. Policies which result in moderate costs and profits per unit, either of farm products, labor, or manufactured products, but also in a balanced expansion in the total number of units sold per producer, can increase the income of each group at the same time without being burdensome to any of the others. Viewed in these terms, there is thus an essential unity among the interests of all three groups. Only by developing our national economic policy in terms consistent with this fundamental unity can all profit at the same time.

It is appropriate that agriculture and labor should not rest until they get bargaining power equivalent to that enjoyed by the corporations. But after they have obtained the power it is even more important that the attention of all three groups be directed at once to co-ordination in the production of ever-increasing quantities of the right kinds of goods.

At the moment there are many misunderstandings, but nevertheless the productivity trend of the United States seems to be steadily on the upgrade. Many people are deeply concerned about the temporary misunderstandings. Serious as they are, I am inclined to think that they are relatively unimportant compared with the growing appreciation on the part of the labor, agricultural and industrial leaders of the necessity of co-operating with each other and with the government to increase production in a balanced way. <P><center><big>* * *</big></center>

Is it now conceded that the function of government is somewhat more than that of an economic salvage crew? Is the cost of salvage, of cleaning up the wreckage from boom and depression, now so great that government should be asked to prevent some of the destruction from ever occurring? If the answer to these questions is "Yes," then of course government must exert an integrating and stabilizing influence in our economy.

Corporations, labor unions and farm organizations are continually making decisions which affect both production and prices. Many of the decisions made by corporations, labor unions and farm organizations are made with the knowledge or actual help of the government. More and more the government is being made aware of the way its monetary policies, tariff policies, regulatory activities and Federal expenditures affect the general welfare. A new science of government is in the making, the broad outlines of which are just beginning to appear.

There is a tendency for organized groups to believe that by exerting pressure they can get from society more than is there. They have had enough temporary success with the use of pressure to be encouraged in this belief. It is easy for farmers to feel that with the help of government they can get two dollars a bushel for their wheat year after year. It is easy for industrial corporations to feel that through monopolistic tariffs and rigid prices they can rake in excessive profits year after year. It is easy for labor to feel that because corporations have frequently accumulated excessive profits, organized labor has only to put on the screws and obtain, year after year, increasingly higher wages and shorter hours.

It is perfectly true that any one group can for a time get a larger share of the national income, but it doesn't work when all try it at the same time. Sooner or later the pressure game will blow up in our faces unless we provide a constantly larger national income to divide up. This is really a matter of simple but intensely practical arithmetic. Unless we learn it, our future is black indeed.

If government is to be partly a policeman, partly a co-ordinator, partly a clearinghouse, and partly a stimulator--all on behalf of the general welfare--the problem of economic democracy becomes supremely important. If government marches into the economic field decisively and directly at the top, the result can be a regimentation of all types of activity in a manner completely abhorrent to the American temperament. Carefree exploitation without thought of the consequences is, of course, delightful to the American temperament. But that has come to an end and we now have to do some searching thinking about serving the future by the processes of economic democracy.

Economic democracy means that the various economic groups must have equality of bargaining power. But going along with this <I>right</I>, there is also the <I>duty </I>of serving the general welfare.

Fundamentally, the most significant things in a modern economy are ideas, technology and natural resources. Secondary to -these are the corporations, the co-operatives, the labor unions, the farm organizations and other organizations through which a true economic democracy can express itself. Here in the United States, at the moment, we have by far the best opportunity to work out an economic democracy which can serve as a model for the entire world. The new world of the general welfare is beckoning. New opportunities await the men with a bent for public service, whether in government,rin labor or in management. The rewards in terms of satisfaction are far beyond those which any captain of industry in the nineteenth century could dream of. The world to which I refer is not fanciful or unreal. The foundation is now being laid, and it is to be hoped that no disturbance abroad will distract our attention from the real job here at home. 



The Genetic Basis of Democracy

A speech delivered on February 12, 1939.

p. 152.  

I want to pay tribute to Dr. Franz Boas. As chairman of the Lincoln's Birthday Committee for Democracy and Intellectual Freedom his leadership has done much to marshal the moral forces of science and to bring us together for this Lincoln's Birthday meeting of scientists in New York City today.

The cause of liberty and the cause of true science must always be one and the same. For science cannot flourish except in an atmosphere of freedom, and freedom cannot survive unless there is an honest facing of facts. The immediate reason for this meeting is the profound shock you have had, and the deep feeling of protest that stirs in you, as you think of the treatment some of your fellow scientists are receiving in other countries. Men who have made great contributions to human knowledge and culture have been deprived of their positions and their homes, put into concentration camps, driven out of their native lands. Their lifework has been reviled.

In those same countries, other men, who call themselves scientists, have been willing to play the game of the dictators by twisting science into a mumbo-jumbo of dangerous nonsense. These men are furnishing pseudo-scientific support for the exaltation of one race and one nation as conquerors. 

These things run counter to your whole tradition as scientists. You are not only amazed and shocked and moved to protest against the fate of your fellow scientists abroad. You shudder with the realization that these things have happened in scientifically advanced countries in the modern world--and that they might happen here.

Claims to racial superiority are not new in the world. Even in such a democratic country as ours, there are some who would claim that the American people are superior to all others. But never before in the world's history has such a conscious and systematic effort been made to inculcate the youth of a nation with ideas of racial superiority as are being made in Germany today.

Just what are these ideas? Let me quote from a translation of the <I>Official Handbook for the Schooling of the Hitler Youth</I>, the organization which includes some seventy percent of all the boys and girls in Germany of eligible age.

The handbook discusses the various races found in Germany and other parts of Europe. Concerning what it calls the Nordic race, it says: "Now what distinguishes the Nordic race from all others? It is uncommonly gifted mentally. It is outstanding for truth and energy. Nordic men far the most part possess, even in regard to themselves, a great power of judgment. They incline to be taciturn and cautious. They feel instantly that too loud talking is undignified. They are persistent and stick to a purpose when once they have set themselves to it. Their energy is displayed not only in warfare but also in technology and in scientific research. They are predisposed to leadership by nature."

But here is what the handbook says concerning what it calls the "Western race," found principally in England and France: "Compared to the Nordic race there are great differences in soul-qualities. The men of the Western race are . . . loquacious. In comparison with the Nordic . . . men they have much less patience. They act more by feeling than by reason .... They are excitable, even passionate: The Western race with all its mental excitability lacks creative power. This race has produced only a few outstanding men."

Thus the dictatorial regime in Germany, masquerading its propaganda in pseudo-scientific terms, is teaching the German boys and girls to believe that their race and their nation are superior to all others, and by implication that that nation and that race have a right to dominate all others.

That is the claim. What ground does it have in scientific fact?

We must remember that down through the ages one of the most popular political devices has been to blame economic and other troubles on some minority group. But no one can claim with scientific certainty superiority for any race or nation so far as its inborn genetic characteristics are concerned. Indeed, no nation in Europe is a greater mixture of tribes and breeds than the Germans. This is of course nothing against them, but it makes absurd the claims of superior stock. The word Aryan as used by scientists and not by dictators means the people of the Caucasian race who speak one or another of the Indo-European languages. (Anyone can look it up in his dictionary.) Jews are of course Aryans, so are Hindus, so are Germans and French and English and most Americans. The dictators' misuse of the word Aryan is pure scientific faking.

Two thousand years ago there was nothing about the ancestors of the modern English or Germans to indicate either scientific, artistic, inventive or philosophic ability. Neither their traditions nor their economic opportunities permitted development along these lines. No scientist can say today with any certainty that many of the so-called backward races and nations do not have inborn genetic capacity which might flower unusually in the sciences, the arts or philosophy, provided only economic conditions and social institutions permitted.

When I was a small boy, George Carver, a Negro who is now a chemist at Tuskegee Institute, was a good friend of my father's at the Iowa State College. Carver at that time was specializing in botany, and he would take me along on some of his botanizing trips. It was he who first introduced me to the mysteries of botany and plant fertilization. Later on I was to have an intimate acquaintance with plants myself, because I spent a good many years breeding corn. Perhaps that was partly because this scientist, who belonged to another race, had deepened my appreciation of plants in a way I could never forget.

Carver was born in slavery, and to this day he does not definitely know his own age. In his work as a chemist in the South, he correctly sensed the coming interest in the industrial use of the products of the farm--a field of research which our government is now pushing. I mention Carver simply because he is one example of a truth of which we who meet here today are deeply convinced. Superior ability is not the exclusive possession of any one race or any one class. It may arise anywhere, provided men are given the right opportunities.

It is the fashion in certain quarters to sneer at those so-called "poor whites," who suffer from poor education and had diet, and who live in tumble-down cabins without mattresses. And yet I wonder if any scientist would care to claim that 100,000 children taken at birth from these families would rank any lower in inborn ability than 100,000 children taken at birth from the wealthiest one percent of the parents of the United States. If both groups were given the same food, housing, education and cultural traditions, would they not turn out to have about equal mental and moral traits on the average? If 100,000 German babies were raised under the same conditions as 100,000 Hindu babies or 100,000 Jewish babies, would there be any particular difference? No such experiments have been made or are likely to be made and so no absolutely scientific answer can be given. But when I raise such a question, I mean to imply that every race, every nation, and people from every economic group of society are a great genetic mixture. There is far greater variability among the heredity of individuals within the groups than among the groups. There may be a certain amount of stability of type with regard to skin and eyes and hair, but with regard to mental and emotional characteristics there is very little evidence of genetic uniformity far any race or nation. There may be a great deal of uniformity with respect to traditions but not with respect to complex hereditary characters.

In all of this I do not mean to say that heredity does not work with human beings just as truly as it does with plants and animals. Nor do I mean to deny that a master breeder living for a thousand years might do extraordinary things in the way of fixing human types of unusual longevity, resistance to disease, musical ability or any one of a number of characteristics. A master breeder who had a dictator's control for several generations might be able to fix a standard blue-eyed, longheaded, fair-haired type of the most approved Nordic specifications. But from our studies in livestock breeding we know that the more complex characteristics are usually altogether separate from such superficial characteristics as skin, hair, or eye color. The color of a cow's hair, for instance, has nothing to do with her ability to produce milk, and there is no reason to think that the color of a man's hair has anything to do with his ability to produce ideas. And so it is quite possible that the master breeder, being concerned primarily with physical appearance, would find he had produced a group of blond morons--useful to him mainly as a superior type of cannon fodder.

On the whole, it seems probable that nowhere in the world in the next couple of centuries will a genuinely scientific attempt, in the sense understood by the plant or animal breeder, be made to breed for superior types of human beings. The different races and nations will continue to be conglomerates with a vast variability of mental and emotional qualities and the other abilities which make for leadership and genius.

Under what conditions will the scientist deny the truth and pervert his science to serve the slogans of tyranny? Under what conditions are great numbers of men willing to surrender all hope of individual freedom and become ciphers of the State? How can these conditions be prevented from occurring in our country?

Seeking to answer all such questions honestly, we shall inevitably come upon certain truths that are not flattering to us. We shall find in our own country some of the conditions that have made possible what we see abroad. It is not enough simply to hope that, these conditions will not reach such extremes here as they have in some other countries. We must see to it that they do not. When a political system fails to give large numbers of men the freedom it has promised, then they are willing to hand over their destiny to another political system. When the existing machinery of peace fails to give them any hope of national prosperity or national dignity, they are ready to try the hazard of war. When education fails to teach them the true nature of things, they will believe fantastic tales of devils and magic. When their normal life fails to give them anything but monotony and drabness, they are easily led to express themselves in unhealthy or cruel ways, as by mob violence. And when science fails to furnish effective leadership, men will exalt demagogues, and science will have to bow down to them or keep silent.

The ironic fact is that the economic maladjustments of the present day which threaten our democracy and the freedom of science are in large part due to the changes wrought by science. In a democracy, every individual according to his station in life and according to his capacity should have opportunity for joyous service of the general welfare. Scientists, by their discoveries and inventions--which in countless ways have enriched our lives--have at the same time, without intending to do so, helped to break down this kind of democracy. Quite without intention, they have helped to replace it with an industrial system in which a small number of individuals make the decisions and the great majority have no feeling that they are taking part according to their capacity on equal terms in a common enterprise. Quite without intention they have helped to build an industrial system in which the security of an earlier day has been replaced with the hazard of unemployment. During 1931 and 1932, many scientists, accustomed to working quietly in their laboratories and with little thought for their own economic security, suddenly found their salaries cut in half or their job's completely gone. Yes, scientists now know that in their own self-defense their methods, in the deepest and most spiritual sense, must eventually serve the general welfare in the economic and social world.

Today, on the 130th anniversary of the birth of Abraham Lincoln, it is especially encouraging that science is facing the facts concerning the long-run effects of its own past achievements. It is encouraging that science at last is working actively for economic security and is coming actively to the defense of "government of the people, by the people, for the people."

Democracy--and that term includes free science--must apply itself to meeting the material need of men for work, for income, for goods, for health, for security, and to meeting their spiritual need for dignity, for knowledge, for self-expression, for adventure and for reverence. And it must succeed. The danger that it will be overthrown in favor of other system is in direct proportion to its failure to meet these needs. We may talk all we like about the beauties of democracy, the ideals of democracy, the rightness of democracy. In the long run, democracy or any other political system will be measured by its deeds, not its words.

The survival and the strength of American democracy are proof that it has succeeded by its deeds thus far. But we all know it contains the seeds of failure. I for one will not be confident of the continued survival of American democracy if millions of unskilled workers and their families are condemned to be reliefers all their lives, with no place in our industrial system. I will not be confident of the survival of democracy if economic crises every few years continue to put fear into the hearts of millions of skilled and professional workers. I will not be confident of the survival of democracy if half our people must continue to be below the line of decent nutrition, while only one-tenth succeed in reaching really good nutritional standards. I will not be confident of the survival of democracy if most of our children, which means most of our future citizens, continue to be reared in surroundings where poverty is highest and education is lowest.

These are the conditions that made possible what we are now witnessing in certain large areas of the world. They are the seeds of danger to democracy. Given a healthy, vigorous, educated people, dignified by work, sharing the resources of a rich country, and sure that their political and economic system is amply meeting their needs--given this, I think we can laugh at any threat to American democracy. But democracy must continue to deliver the goods.

Let us dedicate ourselves anew to the belief that there are extraordinary possibilities in both man and nature which have not yet been realized, and which can be made manifest only if the individualistic yet co-operative genius of democratic institutions is preserved. Let us dedicate ourselves anew to making it possible for those who are gifted in art, science and religion to approach the unknown with true reverence, and not under the compulsion of producing immediate results for the glorification of one man, one group, one race or one nation.



The Hard Choice

Excerpted for Wallace's The American Choice (1940)

p. 163.

There has continually flamed in the hearts of Americans the belief that this continent is different. On this new soil, we have thought, mankind would escape from the compulsions, the suspicions and the greeds of the Old World.

This simple faith may seem rather childlike in this time of anguish, with so much of the civilized world at war again, sick at heart and weary. Even so, our belief remains. We believe that in this New World we will build an even newer world, in which there shall be comfort and security, and freedom and dignity for all. We believe that we are destined to create on this newer soil a higher standard of human freedom and a wider distribution of wealth and happiness.

It is a real faith, wherever you find it. Here in our states, among the twenty republics of America, and in the Dominion of Canada, the American faith is real. If our faith can be made to work here, and probably then more widely, it will remain a real hope in the world's future.

But we are not going to be able to dream our way into that future, or to go on taking our freedom in the easy ways. We are going to have to make hard choices and to stick to them. If we are to stand free and grow in the ways of freedom we must with open eyes make immediate sacrifices to a far end.

The immediate test is this: We shall probably have to turn down some business, already temptingly proffered. We must decide whether or not to do business, on their terms and in their way, with the totalitarian tyrant states, notably with Germany. My own view is that we must refuse to do this. We must at any sacrifice build up not only an armed defense, but an economic defense, both internal and in some part hemispheric, until we are strong enough, both economically and militarily, to do business with Germany and its subject states, and to do that business in a way that will be safe for us.

My first purpose is to examine and to oppose the blindly trustful ands opportunistic view which Old Guard businessmen, economists and statesmen begin to advance, somewhat guardedly, as "practical" and "reasonable." The Germans, they say, seem to be the top dogs in Europe at present; and maybe they aren't such bad fellows after all. They want to do business. We have the goods. Why not?

From the standpoint of genetics the Germans are naturally neither better fellows nor worse fellows than other peoples. They are by nature neither fiends nor supermen. But the Germans are now under the all but complete command of a cunning fanatic who at once enslaves and exalts them by appearing to transform "racial" defeat and humiliation into demoniac exhibitions of superior blood-shedding, power and might.

Hitler and his Nazis have definite designs against this hemisphere, North and South. Their tactics, here as in Europe, are to divide and conquer. By propaganda, by bartering agreements--above all, by a completely centralized and arbitrary, bargaining power--Hitler hopes, here as in Europe, to divide and conquer. The Nazis hope to set us against each other, here in the New World, nation against nation, race against race, special interest against special interest, class against class. And out of the confusion thus created they hope rather quickly to build economic, political and military power that will overwhelm and rule us, here in the New World.

The <I>New York Herald Tribune</I> recently did a magnificent job of reporting in some detail the commercial spying and dickering of one Dr. Gerhardt A. Westrick, a Nazi agent, working out from New York. The exposure has led this agent to leave the country. But there are many others.

I want in the plainest words to say that freedom is over in this country if we let these commercial travelers who are here to sell us Nazism get their foot in our door. They want to trade with us after the war. But they mean to have things their way. At a press conference last August Walther Funk, Hitler's Minister of Economic Affairs, talked to United States foreign correspondents and stated rather bluntly Germany's terms of trade.

"The United States," said Funk, "must give up the idea of forcing its economic conditions on Germany and Europe . . . . To what extent we conduct trade with the United States depends entirely upon Americans themselves . . . .

"When you play marbles and one fellow wins all the marbles, the game ends. You must then think of some new game. When all the gold is in the United States and it doesn't come out again, the world must think of some other medium of exchange."

Actually, this was a bid for some of our twenty and one-half-billion-dollar store of gold--around three-quarters of all the gold in the world. They will want that gold, or enough at least to settle international balances, Dr. Funk admitted, when pressed. A shrewd horse trader always depreciates the worth of the horse he has in mind. "Blood above gold" is a Nazi slogan; and Funk went on to say that world economy would henceforth be dominated by the Reichsmark, the value of which is "assigned by the State." This was a bid for us to devalue the dollar price of gold. It was a threat to press upon us from Berlin dictation of currency values in this country.

The news magazine, <I>Time</I>, of August 5, 1940, reporting this, observes; "If Dr. Funk could really peg all European currencies to a Reichsmark 'work dollar,' he could fix the value of labor in all countries that had to trade with him, [and] would have perfected a streamlined form of international slavery." That is true; and I regard the immediate probability of such tactics (unless we understand what is going on and unitedly rise against it) as more threatening to our freedom than the concrete threat of cruder sabotage in our factories, or the blowing up of munitions dumps. A certain amount of such crude blasting-from-within went on during the First World War. A subtler and far more serious disruption is now proposed, and we must not let them get away with it.

A number of people in this country have business investments in Germany, or entertain prospects of making themselves a lot of money by trading there after the war. I do not suppose that if you add them all up, these Americans would amount to more than one in a million of our total population. But many of them are powerful people, financially speaking, and they are both anxious and determined to do business with German Europe at any cost.

We grew up during the First World War from a struggling debtor nation and took our place as a great creditor in world affairs. We became in a few swift years the greatest creditor nation on earth. But we kept on acting like a headstrong child in the family of nations. In the course of his admonishments to our press correspondents in August, 1940, Reich Minister Funk threw that fact up to us, and I am bound to say that this part of his statement was true:

"The United States . . . must abandon the wrong method of wanting to be at the same time the greatest creditor nation and the greatest export country."

That was true in 1919. It is true today. But most of our Old Guard business and political leaders went right on, and go right on, thinking, talking and acting as if nothing in this world has changed. In 1922 and again in 1930 we reared around our borders the highest, stiffest tariff wall ever erected or even seriously considered in our history. When other nations quite naturally retaliated by raising barriers of their own, by turning their trade elsewhere, and by hastening programs of economic self-containment, our Old Guard leaders were only for a little while dismayed. Panting after "normalcy" and business at any price, yet sharply up against the fact that you have to have an open safety valve of random exports in order to keep on going under an almost entirely unplanned and ungoverned economy, the Old Guard dodged the dilemma by continuing to think or pretend that nothing had changed. We then set out an a program of make-believe sales of our export surpluses. We would not consent to accept anything like an equivalent return of goods from our foreign customers. Our sales abroad became, of necessity, mainly paper sales. We took their notes and piled them up and kept piling goods and credits abroad. We went right on expanding production in industry and in agriculture. It was a curious sort of commercial appeasement, madly optimistic, entirely unrealistic; and it almost wrecked this country when the paper went bad.

Today, many among the Old Guardsmen stand ready to appease Hitler. They are eager to stir up a fateful new show of booming business at any price again. In the United States as well as in the other Americas we find many businessmen who for temporary personal gain want an early peace between England and Germany and who are strong for economic appeasement between the Americas and a German-controlled Europe.

I want to make plain here my complete belief that if such businessmen are permitted to pursue their old game, seeking short-term advantage by means, of compromise after compromise, they will lay us open to enslavement, and will themselves inevitably disappear in the process.

Against Hitler's total warfare we must quickly oppose a total defense. This will involve sacrifices, not only in terms of higher taxes and conscription, but in the exactions and restraints of an economy that almost certainly must, for a while at least, become more nearly self-contained and more closely subject to self-imposed controls. The pain will be actual if we give up the easy business, if we pass up the poisoned olive branch which German Europe is going to offer us. But if we really believe all we have said and done about the rights of man, and freedom and personal honor in this New World, I can see no other safe or decent course.

In closing, I want to show that to appease Hitler by trading with him as he wants us to--would prove the hardest choice, the suicidal choice, in the end. But I must also plainly show that not to trade with Hitler and his puppets, not at least until such time as we have developed hemispheric arms of defense, both economic and military, may require of us stricter internal adjustments and a higher degree of centralized governmental control than we have ever contemplated in our past.

We must realize in a perfectly dispassionate way that the German war machine at the present time must be psychologically very strong. The strength is derived only superficially from Hitler. It has its roots in several generations of systematic imperial Prussian military indoctrination. More recently the German strength is derived from a tremendous concentration of industrial power first in huge cartels, and later under Schacht and Hitler. This situation is probably temporary (perhaps one year--perhaps thirty) and the outstanding question is: What will happen to the rest of the world when and if Germany smashes? Also there is the question of how far the other nations will have to go in imposing economic controls during the period while imperialistic Nazi Germany continues to spread the system now in effect.

This is a fight to make sure that the last home of freedom is made safe for our children. Whether we are forced into active military defense or not, it is a fight that is bound to involve sacrifice and pain. There are no easy ways out. But there are ways that may look easy; and already the easiest ways are being persuasively presented and urged. We who reject these ways as ruinous and fatal must ask ourselves both insistently and searchingly the hardest of questions: How much of our freedom must we relinquish to our country's cause in order to save our freedom?

One curious thing about the question is that candid men who deeply believe in democracy, and candid men who really do not care so much for it, may seem at first to be approaching their solutions to the problem from the same ground. We are going to have to stop talking so much about our freedom, many of our people are beginning to say. It is on the cards that we deal with German Europe; it is not on the cards that we greatly increase our trade with South America, some say. Speaking in August, 1940, at San Francisco before the National Foreign Trade Convention, Joseph C. Rovensky, a vice-president of The Chase National Bank, bluntly argued that this country should retreat from the Hull method as useful only under "normal conditions" and he urged resort to Hitler's method of "barter or compensation trade." "It is entirely probable . . . that we shall also adopt trading practices born of expedience," Mr. Rovensky said.

In a message to the same convention President Roosevelt said that such a course would "subject . . . the entire nation to the regimentation of a totalitarian system." At the same meeting Henry Francis Grady, Assistant Secretary of State, said that to barter thus with Hitler would expose us to a "sixth column of special interests," operating both from without and within.

Perhaps what we shall require to preserve our freedom on this hemisphere is not "regimentation" but regulation of traffic: How for our own security can we direct and keep in hand most safely our flow of outland trade? The opposition want to resume old driving habits, jumping red lights; making their own choices at every danger point and intersection, driving in what they consider in the light of only their own interests to be an "expedient" course. We who take the other view say we would rather see world trade traffic sensibly directed; we say we would much rather drive to our goal under our own democratically-posted signs, danger marks and stop-and-go signals than ride to smash under a trading traffic system more or less secretly directed from Berlin.

I want to be guided in all that I say during this perilous year by a spirit of moderation. I have said that "whether it knows it or not, the Republican party is the party of appeasement." I have added that the Republican standard-bearer is not himself of this persuasion; he, indeed, has stated that he is "100 percent" against appeasing Hitler. But during the fall of 1940 it becomes increasingly clear that the gathering drive for appeasing Hitler has gathered principally around that same old hardheaded group, the powers that be of the G.O.P., the party of "business as usual" by unyielding nineteenth-century standards.

We have reason to fear these shortsighted, stubborn and generally honest men. Leadership such as theirs has drawn us into deep trouble before. But the trouble they would get us into this time would be nothing short of chaotic. I say, deliberately, that they are of the breed and temper of those who stood behind Chamberlain in England, and who made possible the easy conquest of Norway, of Holland, of Belgium and of France. I say that if there is a Hitler victory in Europe there will at once be pressure from within as well as from without for loans to the puppet governments which Hitler has set up in the countries he has conquered. The same business interests which unloaded the worthless bonds of Europe on American investors following the First World War will push hard for the same sort of profits they made then.

If we once embark on this business of selling oil and food and minerals to Hitler's Europe, on his terms, as another return to "normalcy," there will be no turning back. As we drive on toward collapse we shall have to go on yielding more and more to Hitler's demands, tying ourselves more and more tightly to his labor mark, putting ourselves more and more under his heel.

In President Roosevelt's <I>Looking Forward</I>, a book made up of his campaign pronouncements in 1932, he spoke of the postwar Republican trade and credit maneuvers as "romantic adventuring in foreign markets." We must ask ourselves now what would happen to us as a people if those romantic business adventurers, those heedless believers in headlong "economic opportunism," are allowed to run hog-wild again.

This time it would be much more serious than it was the time before. This time, if we let it happen, we shall almost certainly fall victim to highly centralized forces of foreign commercial rule and oppression, the like of which in might and in savagery have never been seen before or even imagined in the time of man. If we go at it this way, headlong, haphazardly, we shall oppose a divided, random and feeble bargaining power on this side of the water to a terrifically concentrated bargaining power on the other side. If we allow ourselves to be drawn unprepared into such blindly opportunistic trading with German Europe, we shall be like a bunch of scurrying boys trying to halt with slingshots a highly concentrated massed attack.

Those who have been or are farmers or working people or men in small businesses know very well that helpless feeling which comes at times when you are up against big combinations of buyers, sellers, promoters, distributors or employers. To counteract the inequalities which arise in trade between individuals standing alone and combined bargaining power on the other side, labor unions, farmer and consumer co-operatives, and associations of smaller businessmen have become the most vital growing points in the development of our democracy.

We have learned what big concerns can do in a cold-blooded, impersonal way to the laboring man who joins a union, to the farmer who joins a farm co-operative, or to the small tradesman who enlists in an association against the march of the chain stores or the big gas chains. But all that we have experienced in the way of monopolistic oppression here in this country will appear to have been as nothing in comparison with the sort of hemispheric monopolistic oppression which German Europe can put upon us, and definitely plans to put upon us, if we seek in a disunited and blindly individual manner to do business with Hitler. If we take the bait and plunge into trade unorganized, then, I want to say most earnestly, our very biggest concerns soon will find themselves to be very little concerns, as compared with the size and might of the opposing bargaining power. Our mightiest private concerns will find, all too soon, how it feels to be a little fellow taking what the big boss will pay when he will pay, it, working when he says you can work, expanding productive capacity when Hitler gives the nod, going to smash when he decides he has had enough of that and nods in another direction.

We want foreign trade. We want all we can get, safely. I am convinced that we can get a good deal of foreign business after this war, safely, if we organize to get it safely, and do not dash out for it disunited. If we make such a dash, I am completely persuaded, Hitler and his concentrated commercial artillery can pick off business by business, region by region, country by country.

There can be no doubt that we face just such danger. If we do not quickly come to think and to act in terms of a unified long-time allegiance to democratic designs, both internally and in concert with our hemispheric neighbors, then the postwar German commercial <I>Putsch </I>upon us, even now developing, can penetrate every seam and point of division and rip us wide open.

We have leaped with a united will and spirit to set up in a hurry a military defense. Difficult problems of engineering and finance confront us in this particular; but far more difficult and intricate is the problem of keeping us united in what we have traditionally been reared to feel is the realm of free and restless enterprise, largely unguided by common concern, outside the realm of democratic government--business. Business in Europe now is surely and mightily a united process. Not only Germany but such countries as still oppose her are buying, in effect, through just one gigantic bargaining agency. We must unite.

We can be very strong here in the Americas if we can unite in this plain and urgent business of presenting as nearly as possible a united front in trading with an avowed enemy. Germany will try to bluff and frighten us into disunited action. She will say that she can get along without the products of this hemisphere. She will hope to develop alternative sources of supply in Africa. It will take her fifteen or twenty years to do the job of developing Africa to take the place of the Americas, in case she wins. But she is going to do everything possible either to dominate the Americas completely or to be independent of them. Germany's immediate postwar trading position in case of victory is strong, but not as overwhelmingly strong as she would have us believe. She will badly need petroleum and copper from the Americas. She will need wool, hides, corn, oil cake and a variety of other products that we have in abundance.

Our country is peopled by those who left Europe to escape regulation of one kind or another. But now both America and the world are growing up. And freedom in a grown-up world is different from freedom in a pioneer world. As a nation grows and matures, the traffic inevitably gets denser, and you need more traffic lights. Those who urge the removal of trade traffic lights speak in behalf of anarchy.

To prevent unemployment, we must put at least four billion dollars of new capital (new debt, unless replaced by common stock) flowing a year. This debt can be private or governmental or both. The choice back of that, if private capital does not flow, is to withhold public money, to go on having unemployment, not take care of it--and face starvation, bloodshed and revolution.

In normal times, everyone would prefer, of course, the private route. But when you have a Hitler in the world-controlling government exports, government imports, government exchange; a Hitler using propaganda, economic penetration, warlike aggression, it is unlikely that any large amount of private capital will flow into the production of peacetime goods.

I think we ought to face the fact that with a Hitler controlling the exports, imports and exchanges, it is impossible to get an adequate out-flow of exports from the United States, and that an increase of governmental intervention is inevitable.

I am delighted when or if government can be withdrawn from the business field, because I have a friendliness toward government and hate to see it placed in the position where, in the world market place, it is exposed to the criticism of both buyers and sellers simultaneously. Yet government has long entered in, the background of the world market place, through its action on tariffs, monetary policies, taxation, regulation of grades, etc. It will probably have to enter the world market place in the future more than in the past. Indeed, it is certain that as long as totalitarian governments exert a profound effect on world trade, our government will have to enter the world market place more than ever.

This does not mean that we must reconcile ourselves to regimentation. A people may submit to laws and regulations of their own devising and still be joyous and free. We can have a rebirth of individualism without going back to the terms of pioneers fleeing all restraint, or giving way to the ethics of the buccaneer businessman who feels that it is his right and privilege to unload worthless stocks or shoddy goods on a gullible public. We can have a new individualism that directs itself in terms of the general welfare, a new individualism based on the capitalism of Main Street, but not disregarding completely what the capitalism of Wall Street has taught us.

The times demand it. It will be necessary for the government and all of us to co-operate in order to make the multitude of adjustments that must be made to meet the situation during the five or ten years following the peace. The danger is that many big income-tax payers will, even before peace comes, set up shouts of "Give us free enterprise," "Take government out of business," "Cut government expenditure at once," "Down with bureaucracy," and so on. This attitude is perfectly natural, but if it is carried into action it will produce a situation infinitely more dangerous than that of 1921 and 1932.

I am well aware of the sins of bureaucracy, its occasional pettiness and red tape. The bureaucracy of any country cannot be much better than the human beings of that country. But I am convinced that governmental bureaucracy, from the standpoint of honesty, efficiency and fairness compares very favorably with corporation bureaucracy. There is less nepotism, less of arbitrary and unfair action, and a more continuous consideration of the general welfare. This is not because human beings in government bureaus are so much finer as individuals than human beings in corporation bureaucracies, but because continuous public scrutiny requires a higher standard.

Economic emergency is like a war. Under stimulus of trouble and danger millions of persons experience a rebirth of their individual wills and know the joy of moving together to pull the nation out of trouble. We in this nation have been under tension almost continuously since 1916. Whether we have realized it completely or not, we have been in a state of emergency ever since the outbreak of World War I. For nearly a quarter of a century we have experienced the greatest need for unity if we are to adjust ourselves to a world continuously and violently changing. World War II inevitably will make it necessary for us to adjust our ways more completely. The good old days are not coming back. We are going on into a new world with a determined will to make it a better one.


The Strength and Quietness of Grass

A speech delivered by radio on June 21, 1940.

p. 175.

Uppermost in all our minds these days are tragedies and alarms which we cannot escape. But it is natural that we should think of other things in relation to them; so even when I think about the place of grass in American agriculture I find myself thinking in terms of the world situation and our own future.

I have always had a great affection for grass. It seems to stand for quietness and strength. I believe that the quietness and strength of grass should be, must be, permanently a part of our agriculture if this nation is to have the strength it will need in the future. A countryside shorn and stripped of thick, green grass, it seems to me, is weakened just as Sampson was. An agriculture without grass loses a primary source of strength.

It is only recognizing the truth to say that in the past we have been lured by the Delilah of profits to destroy grass covering recklessly. We plowed up millions of acres of grassland; we overgrazed millions of other acres. We thought too much, and we still think too much, in terms of plows and cultivators. My guess is that even today not one farmer in ten uses good pasture methods. Grass we have. Pastures we have. But our grass is usually on land that we figure is no good for anything else; and after we put the grass in, we neglect it.

Many people blame science for our surplus of farm products. They say that science taught us how to grow two blades of grass where one grew before. I think the trouble is that is exactly what science did not teach us. Instead it taught us how to grow something else where two blades of grass grew before. Now we are beginning to see the weaknesses of an agriculture stripped of grass. More and more we are turning in thought and practice toward an agriculture in which grass will act as the great balance wheel and stabilizer to prevent gluts of other crops--to save soil from destruction--to build up a reserve of nutrients and moisture in the soil, ready for any future emergency, to create a more prosperous livestock industry, and finally to contribute to the health of our people through better nutrition.






Foundations of the Peace

A article written for the Atlantic Monthly just prior to the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor.

p. 179.

In these days of world crisis, there are many who say, "Let us have no talk of peace until the war is won." There are others who have said, "Let us not think of helping to win the war until the details of the peace are completely settled." I believe the sensible and constructive course to take is this: Do everything we can to speed our drive for victory, because unless Hitler and his Italian and Japanese partners are defeated there will be only the cold, bleak hopelessness of a new Dark Age. At the same time, think hard and often about the future peace, because unless we and the other democracies have confidence in that peace our resistance to our enemies may not be strong enough to beat them.

Thinking of the future peace, in other words, is not searching for an escape from the stern realities of the present, not taking refuge in airy castles of our minds. From the practical standpoint of putting first things first, at a time when there are not enough hours in a day and every minute counts, planning for the future peace must of necessity be a part of our all-out war program. More than that, the daily actions being taken now by both Britain and ourselves are determining to a large extent the kind of postwar world we can have later on.

It seems almost certain that sometime within the next few years another peace will be written. If it should be a Hitler peace, no one but Hitler and his henchmen would be allowed any part in writing it. But if, with this country's determined participation and support, the Allies are successful, the world will have a second chance to organize its affairs on a basis of human decency and mutual welfare.

Again, as in 1919, there will be the question of what to do about the world's armies, the question of machinery to prevent new aggression, the question of what to do about national boundaries. And again, as in 1919, at the roots of all these knotty questions will be the fundamental problem of restoring the world's trade and of expanding economic activity so as to improve living standards everywhere.

We are now aware, after our experience of the last twenty-five years, that the most careful delineation of national boundaries is not in itself enough to prevent the world from suffering a repetition of the catastrophe of general war. Nor can this be prevented simply by the establishment of an international league. We know now that the modern world must be recognized for what it is--an economic unit--and that wise arrangements must be made so that trade will be encouraged. The foundations of democracy can be rendered safe only when people everywhere have an opportunity to work and buy and sell with a reasonable assurance that they will be able to enjoy the fruits of their work.

Actually, the seeds of the present world upheaval were sown in the faulty economic decisions that followed the war of a generation ago. The vast sums of reparations imposed on Germany, however justified they may have been on moral grounds, were an indigestible lump in Europe's financial stomach. The war debts owed to the United States by the Allies were equally a handicap to trade. All over the world, the old international gold standard had broken down, and nothing effective was done to replace or restore it. Europe was left cut up into many small national units, and each of these units was left free to erect tariff and trade barriers as it pleased. Many nations, including our own, tried to buy as little as possible from the rest of the world and to sell as much as possible. European countries that normally bought wheat and meat from overseas shifted their production policies with a view to becoming self-sufficient in food. This not only lowered their own standard of living, but upset the economies of the exporting countries. The United States, newly become a creditor nation, adopted tariff policies which only a debtor nation could hope to live with, and in so doing helped make it certain that the world would go through hell.

The dislocations brought by that First World War and by the unwise management of the peace were especially hard on the raw-material producers of the world. Prices of raw materials are extremely sensitive to changes in demand or supply. Therefore, various groups of raw-material producers, including the farmers, found themselves in serious trouble when their supplies were greater than demand. The fall in raw-material's prices and the resulting lack of purchasing power of the raw-material producers became a serious threat to the well-being of countries everywhere:

For ten years after the First World War, the deadly economic malady afflicting the world was covered up by the billions in private loans floated by foreign borrowers in the United States. These loans were usually floated at high rates of interest and used for purposes which, for the most part, did not increase the borrowing countries ability to pay either the interest or the principal. Thus they produced a temporary, though basically unsound, prosperity. When the stream of loans suddenly dried up, the flimsiness of this prosperity of gaudy tinsel was revealed, and the whole thing came crashing dawn.

In very truth this nation, during those early postwar years, was sowing the wind by its policies of isolation, high tariffs, unwise foreign loans, and high-pressure sales abroad. It could not avoid reaping the whirlwind.

Spokesmen for the isolationist point of view did not support President Roosevelt in his stand for a peace built around freedom of speech and expression, freedom of worship, freedom from want and freedom from fear. They were quick to condemn the President for having joined with Winston Churchill in subscribing to the Atlantic Charter. They saw dangerous foreign entanglements in such, simple words of the President as these: "The co-operation which we seek is the co-operation of free countries, working together in a friendly civilized society."

We may wonder whether the long and bitter fight put up by the isolationists in the decade of the twenties to keep the United States from behaving as if it were part of the world is to be renewed when the time comes for building a new peace. What they do will have an important bearing on political alignments in the United States. The injection of such an issue into politics would ordinarily be nothing of which to complain, for surely the people have a right to choose the policies they want the nation to pursue. But the really serious aspect of the matter is that the whole future not only of this country but of human civilization itself may depend on, the ability and willingness of the American people to take the broad view.

For my part, I believe that the American people have profited from their experiences of the last twenty-five years. I believe that they will perceive, with increasingly clear vision, the place of leadership in the world which the United States can scarcely avoid occupying; and that they will support policies and arrangements for sensible co-operation with other countries.

One evidence of the more enlightened point of view is found in the wide understanding of the great practical difficulties in the way of this country's trying to receive billions of dollars in goods and services when the war ends, in exchange for the weapons and food now being shipped abroad under the Lend-lease Act. There seems some merit in the often-heard suggestion that the United States will be well repaid if Britain and the other recipients of lend-lease materials enter genuinely, intelligently and wholeheartedly into co-operative relationships to ensure the world's economic and social stability after the war.<BR>

The peace aims which Roosevelt and Churchill have enumerated are splendid statements of principle. They open up big fields for exploration. The job now is to work out, as definitely as we can while the war is still in progress, practical ways and means for realizing them.

Preliminary studies of some of the expected postwar problems already are being made by the Economic Defense Board and the Cabinet departments whose chiefs are members of that board. This is being done in accordance with the Executive Order of July 30, 1941, which directed the Board to "make investigation and advise the President on the relationship of economic defense . . . measures to postwar economic reconstruction and on the steps to be taken to protect the trade position of the United States and to expedite the establishment of sound, peacetime international economic relationships:"

Now, what must be considered in establishing such "sound relationships" in peacetime? There are certain basic facts which cannot be ignored. One of these is the universal necessity of access to raw materials and the need for an economic arrangement to protect the raw-material producers of the world from such violent fluctuation in income as took place after World War I. Another is the indispensability of markets for goods produced. A third is the present existence in all countries of tariffs and other barriers to imports. A fourth is the use of gold as a base for national currencies and as a means of settling international trade balances. A fifth is the place of credit in stimulating international trade. A sixth is the close relationship between stable national currencies and the exchange of goods and services. A seventh, and most important of all, is the essential role of adequate purchasing power within the various countries that are trading with each other--for full employment within nations makes broad trade possible with other nations. All these facts and factors are of prime importance in determining the state of the world's health, and they will naturally form some of the main ingredients of postwar economic planning, if it is to be done an a comprehensive scale.

Each of these aspects of world trade is a vast subject in itself, and I do not have space here to discuss them all. However, I do wish to point out that basic to any sensible ordering of the world's economic life is the stabilizing of the production and prices of raw materials.

During the twenties and thirties, when the raw-material producers were in such frequent trouble, various methods were developed to help them adjust themselves to the painful realities of diminishing demand. There were the Stevenson rubber plan, the Chadbourne sugar arrangement, the beginning of an international wheat agreement, and in the United States an ever-normal granary program. The plight of the producers was so difficult that in most, of these remedies very little effort was made to think about the consumer. More than any of the other plans, the ever-normal granary in this country recognized consumer needs by setting up huge stockpiles of wheat, cotton, and corn. The stated objective was to carry over the surplus from the fat years to the lean years, thus benefiting the producer in the years of overproduction and very low prices and helping the consumer in years when the supplies otherwise would be short and the prices high. As things turned out, our ever-normal granary stocks of corn made possible our quick and heavy shipments of pork and dairy products to Great Britain during this last year. Those of us who formulated the ever-normal granary program had in mind that supplies might eventually be very helpful in case of war. But none of us at that time visualized also how important these supplies might be to the war-stricken territories during the years immediately following the declaration of peace.

As part of the effort to win the peace, I am hoping that what might be called the "ever-normal granary principle" can be established for a number of commodities an a world-wide scale. It will be remembered that the fourth point of the eight points agreed upon by Roosevelt and Churchill in the Atlantic Charter mentioned the enjoying by all the states, great or small, victor or vanquished, of access on equal terms to the raw materials of the world. To give this lofty ideal a mare definite substance should be one of our chief objectives in the months that lie immediately ahead. The people of all Europe should feel that there are available, in the United States, in Latin America, and in the British Dominions, tremendous quantities of raw materials which can be used for food, clothing, and shelter within a short time after the war comes to an end.

Thus far, there have been no definite arrangements between the United States and the British Empire or between the United States and Latin America with regard to handling the raw-material problems of the world in such a way as to make for a just peace. A beginning has been made along this line with the international wheat-agreement meeting which was held in Washington last July. Nothing has yet been signed, but it is apparent that the United States, Argentina, Canada, and Australia, as well as Great Britain, are moving in the direction of a "world ever-normal granary," with export quotas and with prices stabilized at a point to be fair to producers and consumers.

The world cotton problem is similar in some ways to the world wheat problem, but less progress has been made toward orderly marketing arrangements for cotton than for wheat.

Huge surpluses of both cotton and wheat are piled up in the exporting countries, waiting to be used whenever the stricken countries are able once more to handle them. Of cotton, there is stored in the United States a supply sufficient to take care of the normal needs of all Europe for at least a year. Of wheat, the United States last July 1 had a carryover about four times the normal of the twenties, and it is evident that next July 1 the carryover will be nearly seven times the normal of the twenties. In Canada the situation is somewhat similar; while in Argentina and Australia large surpluses loom for the near future. Four great wheat-exporting nations of the world now have a billion more bushels on hand than they did during the first half of the twenties. This is approximately twice as much wheat as moved in world trade in the years preceding the outbreak of the war. It is enough wheat to feed the entire population of continental Europe for a large part of a year, or to cover the Continent's import requirements far nearly three years.

When the curse of the Nazi mailed fist is at last removed from the stricken countries overseas, the first and most pressing need will be action to bring food to the starving and the undernourished. For this purpose the accumulated surplus stocks of wheat and the increased production of other foods far which farmers are now pushing will be enormously helpful. The pity is that there is no practical way to get this food to these people now without helping the Nazis and thus postponing the day of real liberation of these people from the Nazi yoke.

Besides food, the devastated regions will have urgent need of other materials and equipment to assist in their reconstruction. Homes, factories, office buildings, schools, churches, highways, railroads, bridges, have been destroyed in large numbers. In the tremendous job of rebuilding. which must be undertaken, the United States and the other countries of the Western Hemisphere can play a vital part. Meanwhile, both strategy and humanity will be served if we take every opportunity to let the people of the occupied countries know that we intend to stand behind them in their efforts to get back on their feet. That will give them something to which to cling during their months or years of misery and will speed the day of a Nazi collapse and the emancipation of the world.

The democratic countries are in splendid position to organize themselves for rapid relief work as soon as peace comes. I am confident that we can do this job and do it well. But we must be looking ahead to the longer future and laying plans on more than just a temporary basis.<BR>

It is now clear that by the end of the war the non-Axis nations will have a greater production of raw materials, a greater output of manufactured products, and a greater number of skilled workers than ever before. Nearly half of their production may be going to the British and American governments by the time Hitler is overthrown. If two such customers were to drop out of the market abruptly; it would break everyone. Businessmen know this.

We in the democracies must begin to realize, therefore, that if we can afford tremendous sums of money to win the war, we can afford to invest whatever amount it takes to win the peace. If that necessity were accepted today, both here and in England, we could be writing a very important part of the peace now. Both nations could be making contracts with producers of raw materials throughout the world for delivery of their goods during the war and for several years beyond the armistice at reasonable prices and not at inflated prices. That would sharply reduce the cost of winning the war and give more assurance than any other single action that business is not, going to be allowed to collapse after the fighting is over. There would be no better use to which this country's gold could be put than in making such purchases. Many of the goods bought in this manner for postwar delivery would have to be sold on credit by the British and ourselves for reconstruction within the devastated nations.

Just as individuals here and in England are being encouraged to build up future purchasing power for themselves through defense bonds and other devices, so raw-material-producing countries would by means of such a plan as this be accumulating purchasing power in the form of gold. This gold could be used in the future for buying the finished goods of Europe and America.

Not only would the gold which these countries would thereby obtain make it possible for them to buy finished goods of Europe and America, but it could also be used in part to provide much needed strength for their currency and banking systems, and make it possible for them progressively to relax the stringent exchange controls, import quotas, and clearing arrangements which serve so effectively to restrict the flow of goods from country to country. Without adequate gold reserve and with out the ability to obtain the kind of credit which can be utilized to pay for imports, a country is greatly handicapped in its conduct of foreign trade, and, in order to prevent its currency from depreciating in the foreign-exchange market and its credit from deteriorating, finds itself forced to adopt illiberal trade policies and severe restrictions on its imports. With increased gold holdings countries will be able to pursue more effectively a policy of stable foreign exchange and liberal trade practices.

If we get the right kind of peace, we are sure to see the whole world within a few years operating on a much higher level of production than ever before and this would of course mean a greater world market for raw materials.

Given the right kind of peace, this prospect of greater world trade is certain to materialize, for it rests on the sure prospect of continued industrialization everywhere. The process of industrialization is the way to attain higher standards of living. Everywhere there are communities that must increase their proportion of people engaged in industry and reduce the number of people engaged in the production of farm products. Even in the United States there are many areas where we want to see as soon as possible a shift in the degree of industrialization. Communities that are now only forty percent industrial could, in the course of the next ten years, become perhaps fifty percent industrial. Similarly, there are many communities in southern Europe, Latin America, and the Pacific countries where that kind of shift would be of tremendous value from the standpoint of raising living standards. For every unit of gain in per capita living standards that a shift to a higher proportion of industrialization would mean in the United States, it would mean proportionately a much greater gain in the countries where industrialization is just begun. One of the difficult problems which we have to face is the need for helping numerous countries shift to increased industrialization without encouraging them to resort to high tariff schedules to accomplish that end.

Fortunately, in many cases the low level of industrialization is not a result of circumstances for which there is no remedy, but a consequence of the scarcity of capital and lack of proper technicians. It should be possible with intelligent effort to help those countries get both. Such growth in industrialization will assure the raw-material countries, which will be exchanging present production for gold, a continued market for their raw materials far into the future.

Some such program as here suggested might be worked out in collaboration with the British, and the democracies of Europe and Latin America, and put into effect boldly long before we come to an armistice. Probably the English-speaking peoples of the world will have to take the lead in underwriting world prosperity for a generation to come. They must begin now to prove by their actions that they are as interested in winning the peace as they are in winning the war. If this long-term, businesslike purchase of raw materials were working within six months, it would be worth a thousand blueprints at the peace conference. It is one of the ways in which we can build up morale for the struggle ahead. It is one of the ways in which we can build an economic future solid enough to be worth fighting for.

The overthrow of Hitler is only half the battle; we must build a world in which our human and material resources are used to the utmost if we are to win a complete victory. This principle should be fundamental as the world moves to reorganize its affairs. Ways must be found by which the potential abundance of the world can be translated into real wealth and a higher standard of living. Certain minimum standards of food clothing, and shelter ought to be established, and arrangements ought to be made to guarantee that no one should fall below those standards.

In this country we have already made a start in this direction. Through the food-stamp plan, the cotton-stamp plan, the school-lunch program, the low-cost-milk program, and the homemade-mattress program, the abundance of the farms is being put to use instead of being allowed to go to waste. Similar programs are in effect in greater or less degree in a number of South American countries, notably Argentina, Uruguay, Brazil, and Chile. In England, the government is subsidizing consumption of certain foods so as to make sure that the population is as well nourished as possible during the time of stress, and to keep the prices as near as possible to the prewar level. Among the kinds of food subsidized are flour, bread, meat, tea, oatmeal, milk, and orange juice.

Is it not time to recognize that minimum standards of nutrition are as important for growing children as minimum standards of education? Is it not just as important that children should have sound and healthy bodies as that they should have trained minds? If we can afford $100 a year to educate a child, can't we afford $15 or $20 a year to keep that child physically fit for study?

If there is general recognition of this principle, then vast new markets for the world's production can be opened up. Perhaps the various countries can do still more than they have already done with relief distribution programs based primarily on their own domestic products. In certain instances these could be supplemented with foreign-grown products. For example, we could exchange our pork and lard and flour for South America's tropical fruits and cocoa. In terms of the residual balance, the cost of such a program may be less than the financial loss coming from demoralized raw-material markets, needy producers and hungry consumers.

In the field of food, minimum standards would mean that vastly increased quantities of dairy products, poultry products, meat, fruits, and vegetables would have to be produced. This would mean a shift from the production of staples such as wheat.

Perhaps the heavily populated countries of Europe can reorganize their own agriculture along those lines. This would mean a higher standard of living for their own people, and would restore to producing countries elsewhere the job of producing the wheat that is needed.

I do not mean to imply that I consider such mechanism as the food-and-cotton-stamp plans the final answer to the problem of assuring an economy of abundance. In that part of the world where democracy and capitalism prevail, the permanent answer lies in finding ways to make our system of production and exchange work more effectively and more consistently. That can be done by removing trade barriers, and enlarging markets; by stimulating and guiding investments where they can be productive; by reducing--through appropriate fiscal policy and social-security program--the inequalities in incomes, so that a higher and more stable demand for consumers' goods will be attained; by applying advanced techniques and skills to the development of undeveloped areas; by re-equipping our own industrial and transportation system; and by providing to those people in greatest need better housing, schooling, and recreation.

Most people do not want charity. They want paying jobs. They will be able to have paying jobs, with few interruptions, if prices, production, and purchasing power can be held in balance with one another, and the economic machine can be kept running steadily and smoothly. This is the challenge to the leaders of industry, agriculture, labor, and government. It is a challenge to the highest statesmanship of our own and other nations. Of course there are difficulties and obstacles. Only by recognizing and studying obstacles can they be surmounted.

A "new order" is truly waiting to be created--not the "new order" which the Nazis talk about and which would cloak the new form of slavery they would impose, but a new order of democracy where security, stability, efficiency, and widely distributed abundance would prevail.

Many persons in the United States are deeply disturbed over the heavy government borrowing and the drastic shifts in our economy made necessary by the defense program. They fear an end of the war almost as much as the war itself, because they believe the return of peace would bring another bad depression. But one of the hopeful signs for the future is the very fact that the possibility of depression is so widely recognized. This increases the chance that action will be taken in time to prevent it or at least to cushion the shock. The basis for such action can best be laid now, while the war is still in progress. It must be laid, at least in part, in the plans for expanding and regularizing world trade, world production, world consumption. This is the new frontier, which Americans in the middle of the twentieth century find beckoning them on.


The Price of Free World Victory

A speech delivered to the Free World Association, New York City, May 8, 1942.

p. 190.

This is a fight between a slave world and a free world. Just as the United States in 1862 could not remain half slave and half free, so in 1942 the world must make its decision for a complete victory one way or the. other.

As we begin the final stages of this fight to the death between the free world and the slave world, it is worth while to refresh our minds about the march of freedom for the common man. The idea of freedom--the freedom that we in the United States know and love so well--is derived from the Bible, with its extraordinary emphasis on the dignity of the individual. Democracy is the only true political expression of Christianity.

The prophets of the Old Testament were the first to preach social justice. But that which was sensed by the prophets many centuries before Christ was not given complete and powerful political expression until our nation was formed as a Federal Union a century and a half ago. Even then the march of the common people had just begun. Most of them did not yet know how to read and write. There were no public schools to which all children could go. Men and women cannot be really free until they have plenty to eat, and time and ability to read and think and talk things over. Down the years, the people of the United States have moved steadily forward in the practice of democracy. Through universal education, they now can read and write and form opinions of their own. They have learned, and are still learning, the art of production--that is, how to make a living. They have learned, and are still learning, the art of self-government.

If we were to measure freedom by standards of nutrition, education and self-government, we might rank the United States and certain nations of western Europe very high. But this would not be fair to other nations where education has become widespread only in the last twenty years. In many nations, a generation ago, nine out of ten of the people could not read or write. Russia, for example, was changed from an illiterate to a literate nation within one generation and, in the process, Russia's appreciation of freedom was enormously enhanced. In China, the increase during the past thirty years in the ability of the people to read and write has been matched by their increased interest in real liberty.

Everywhere, reading and writing are accompanied by industrial progress, and industrial progress sooner or later inevitably brings a strong labor movement. From a long-time and fundamental point of view, there are no backward peoples which are lacking in mechanical sense. Russians, Chinese, and the Indians both of India and the Americas all learn to read and write and operate machines just as well as your children and my children. Everywhere the common people are on the march.

When the freedom-loving people march--when the farmers have an opportunity to buy land at reasonable prices and to sell the produce of their land through their own organizations, when workers have the opportunity to form unions and bargain through them collectively, and when the children of all the people have an opportunity to attend schools which teach them truths of the real world in which they live--when, these opportunities are open to everyone, then the world moves straight ahead. 

But in countries where the ability to read and write has been recently acquired or where the people have had no long experience in governing themselves on the basis of their own thinking, it is easy for demagogues to arise and prostitute the mind of the common man to their own base ends. Such a demagogue may get financial help from some person of wealth who is unaware of what the end result will be. With this backing, the demagogue may dominate the minds of the people, and, from whatever degree of freedom they have, lead them backward into slavery.

The march of freedom of the past 150 years bas been a long-drawn-out people's revolution. In this great revolution of the people, there were the American Revolution of 1775, the French Revolution of 1792, the Latin American revolutions of the Bolivian era, the German Revolution of 1848, and the Russian Revolution of 1917. Each spoke for the common man in terms of blood on the battlefield. Some went to excess. But the significant thing is that the people groped their way to the light. More of them learned to think and work together.

The people's revolution aims at peace and not at violence, but if the rights of the common man are attacked, it unleashes the ferocity of a she-bear who has lost a cub. When the Nazi psychologists tell their master Hitler that we in the United States may be able to produce hundreds of thousands of planes, but that we have no will to fight, they are only fooling themselves and him. The truth is that when the rights of the American people are transgressed, as those rights have been transgressed, the American people will fight with a relentless fury which will drive the ancient Teutonic gods back cowering into their caves. The G&#246;tterd&#228;mmerung has come for Odin and his crew.

The people are on the march toward even fuller freedom than the most fortunate peoples of the earth have hitherto enjoyed. No Nazi counterrevolution will stop it. The common man will smoke the Hitler stooges out into the open in the United States, in Latin America, and in India. He will destroy their influence. No Lavals, no Mussolinis will be tolerated in a Free World.

The people, in their millennial and revolutionary march toward manifesting here on earth the dignity that is in every human soul, hold as their credo the Four Freedoms enunciated by President Roosevelt in his message to Congress on January 6, 1941. These Four Freedoms are the very core of the revolution for which the United Nations have taken their stand. We who live in the United States may think there is nothing very revolutionary about freedom of religion, freedom of expression, and freedom from the fear of secret police. But when we begin to think about the significance of freedom from want for the average man, then we know that the revolution of the past 150 years has not been completed, either here in the United States or in any other nation in the world. We know that this revolution cannot stop until freedom from want has actually been attained.

And now, as we move forward toward realizing the Four Freedoms of this people's revolution, I would like to speak about four duties. It is my belief that every freedom, every right, every privilege has its price, its corresponding duty without which it cannot be enjoyed. The four duties of the people's revolution, as I see them today, are these:<P><ol><li>The duty to produce to the limit.<li>The duty to transport as rapidly as possible to the field of battle.<li>The duty to fight with all that is in us.<li>The duty to build a peace--just, charitable and enduring.</ol><P>The fourth duty is that which inspires the other three.

We failed in our job after World War I. We did not know how to go about building an enduring worldwide peace. We did not have the nerve to follow through and prevent Germany from rearming. We did not insist that she "learn war no more." We did not build a peace treaty on the fundamental doctrine of the people's revolution. We did not strive wholeheartedly to create a world where there could be freedom from want for all the peoples. But by our very errors we learned much, and after this war we shall be in position to utilize our knowledge in building a world which is economically, politically and, I hope, spiritually sound.

Modern science, which is a by-product and an essential part of the people's revolution, has made it technologically possible to see that all of the people of the world get enough to eat. Half in fun and half seriously, I said the other day to Madame Litvinov: "The object of this war is to make sure that everybody in the world has the privilege of drinking a quart of milk a day." She replied: "Yes, even half a pint." The peace must mean a better standard of living for the common man, not merely in the United States and England, but also in India, Russia, China and Latin America--not merely in the United Nations, but also in Germany and Italy and Japan.

Some have spoken of the "American Century:" I say that the century on which we are entering--the century which will come out of this war--can be and must be the century of the common man. Everywhere the common man must learn to build his own industries with his own hands in a practical fashion. Everywhere the common man must learn to increase his productivity so that he and his children can eventually pay to the world community all that they have received. No nation will have the God-given right to exploit other nations. Older nations will have the privilege to help younger nations get started on the path to industrialization, but there must be neither military nor economic imperialism. The methods of the nineteenth century will not work in the people's century which is now about to begin. India, China, and Latin America have a tremendous stake in the people's century. As their masses learn to read and write, and as they become productive mechanics, their standard of living will double and treble. Modern science, when devoted wholeheartedly to the general welfare, has in it potentialities of which we do not yet dream.

And modern science must be released from German slavery. International cartels that serve American greed and the German will to power must go. Cartels in the peace to come must be subjected to international control for the common man, as well as being under adequate control by the respective home governments. In this way, we can prevent the Germans from again building a war machine while we sleep. With international monopoly pools under control, it will be possible for inventions to serve all the people instead of only the few.

Yes, and when the time of peace comes, the citizen will again have a duty, the supreme duty of sacrificing the lesser interest for the greater interest of the general welfare. Those who write the peace must think of the whole world. There can be no privileged peoples. We ourselves in the United States are no more a master race than the Nazis. And we can not perpetuate economic warfare without planting the seeds of military warfare.

If we really believe that we are fighting for a people's peace, all the rest becomes easy. Production, yes--it will be easy to get production without either strikes or sabotage, production with the wholehearted co-operation between willing arms and keen brains; enthusiasm, zip, energy geared to the tempo of keeping at it everlastingly, day after day. Hitler knows as well as those of us who sit in on the War Production Board meetings that we here in the United States are winning the battle of production.

I need say little about the duty to fight. Some people declare, and Hitler believes, that the American people have grown soft in the last generation. Hitler agents continually preach in South America that we are cowards, unable to use, like the "brave" German soldiers, the weapons of modern war. It is true that American youth hates war with a holy hatred. But because of that fact and because Hitler and the German people stand as the very symbol of war, we shall fight with a tireless enthusiasm until war and the possibility of war have been removed from this planet.

The American people have always had guts and always will have. You know the story of Bomber Pilot Dixon and Radioman Gene Aldrich and Ordnanceman Tony Pastula--the story which Americans will be telling their children for generations to illustrate man's ability to master any fate. These men lived for thirty-four days on the open sea in a rubber life raft, eight feet by four feet, with no food but that which they took from the sea and the air with one pocketknife and a pistol. And yet they lived it through and came at last to the beach of an island they did not know. In spite of their suffering and weakness, they stood like men, with no weapon left to protect themselves, and no shoes on their feet or clothes on their backs, and walked in military file because, they said, "if there were Japs, we didn't want to be crawling."

The American fighting men, and all the fighting men of the United Nations, will need to summon all their courage during the next few months. I am convinced that the summer and fall of 1942 will be a time of supreme crisis for us all.

We must be especially prepared to stifle the fifth columnists in the United States who will try to sabotage not merely our war-material plants, but even more important, our minds. We must be prepared for the worst kind of fifth-column work in Latin America, much of it operating through the agency of governments with which the United States at present is a peace. When I say this, I recognize that the people, both of Latin America and of the nations supporting the agencies through which the fifth columnists work, are overwhelmingly on the side of the democracies. We must expect the offensive against us on the military, propaganda and sabotage fronts, both in the United States and in Latin America, to reach its apex some time during the next few months. But in the case of most of us, the events of the next few months, disturbing though they may be, will only increase our will to bring about complete victory in this war of liberation. Prepared in spirit, we cannot be surprised. Psychological terrorism will fall flat. As we nerve ourselves for the supreme effort in this hemisphere, we must not forget the sublime heroism of the oppressed in Europe and Asia, whether it be in the mountains of Yugoslavia, the factories of Czechoslovakia and France, the farms of Poland, Denmark, Holland and Belgium, among the seamen of Norway, or in the occupied areas of China and the Dutch East Indies. Everywhere the soul of man is letting the tyrant know that slavery of the body does not end resistance.

There can be no half measures. North, South, East, West and Middle West--the will of the American people is for complete victory.

No compromise with Satan is possible. We shall not rest until all the victims under the Nazi yoke are freed. We shall fight for a complete peace as well as a complete victory.

The people's revolution is on the march, and the devil and all his angels cannot prevail against it. They cannot prevail, for on the side of the people is the Lord.

He giveth power to the faint; to them that have no might He increaseth strength . . . . They that wait upon the Lord shall mount up with wings as eagles; they shall run, and not be weary; they shall walk and not be faint.

Strong in the strength of the Lord, we who fight in the people's cause will never stop until that cause is won. 



World Organization

Speech delivered by radio on the 86th anniversary of Woodrow Wilson's birth, December 28, 1942.

p. 200.


For the people of the United States, the war is entering its grimmest phase. At home, we are beginning at last to learn what war privations mean. Abroad, our boys in ever-greater numbers are coming to grips with the enemy. Yet, even while warfare rages on, and we of the United Nations are redoubling our great drive for victory, there is dawning the hope of that day of peace, however distant, when the lights will go on again all over the world.

Adolf Hitler's desperate bid for a Nazi world order has reached and passed its highest point and is on its way to its ultimate downfall. The equally sinister threat of world domination by the Japanese is doomed eventually to fail. When the Hitler regime finally collapses and the Japanese war lords are smashed, an entirely new phase of world history will be ushered in. The task of our generation--the generation which President Roosevelt once said has a "rendezvous with destiny"--is so to organize human affairs that no Adolf Hitler, no power-hungry warmongers, whatever their nationality, can ever again plunge the whole world into war and bloodshed.

The situation in the world today is parallel in some ways to that in the United States just before the adoption of the Constitution, when it was realized that the Articles of Confederation had failed and that some stronger union was needed.

Today, measured by travel time, the whole world is actually smaller than was our little country then. When George Washington was inaugurated, it took <I>seven </I>days to go by horse-drawn vehicle from Mount Vernon to New York. Now Army bombers are flown from the United States to China and India in less than <I>three </I>days.

It is in this suddenly-shrunken world that the United Nations, like our thirteen American States in 1787, soon will be faced with a fundamental choice. We know now that the League of Nations, like our own union under the Articles of Confederation, was not strong enough. The League never had American support, and at critical moments it lacked the support of some of its own members. The League finally disintegrated under the successive blows of worldwide economic depression and a second World War. Soon the nations of the world will have to face this question: Shall the world's affairs be so organized as to prevent a repetition of these twin disasters--the bitter woe of depression and the holocaust of war?

It is especially appropriate to discuss this subject on this particular date, because it is the birthday of Woodrow Wilson, who gave up his health and eventually his life in the first attempt, a generation ago, to preserve the world's peace through united world action. At that time, there were many who said that Wilson had failed. Now we know that it was the world that failed, and the suffering and war of the last few years are the penalty it is paying for its failure.

When we think of Woodrow Wilson, we know him not only for his effort to build a permanent peace but for the progressive leadership he gave our country in the years before that First World War. The "New Freedom" for which Wilson fought was the forerunner of the Roosevelt "New Deal" of 1933 and of the worldwide new democracy which is the goal of the United Nations in this present struggle.

Wilson, like Jefferson and Lincoln before him, was interested first and always in the welfare of the common man. And so the ideals of Wilson and the fight he made for them are an inspiration to us today as we take up the torch he laid down.

Resolved as we are to fight on to final victory in this worldwide people's war, we are justified in looking ahead to the peace that will inevitably come. Indeed, it would be the height of folly not to prepare for peace, just as in the years prior to December 7, 1941, it would have been the height of folly not to prepare for war.

As territory previously overrun by the Germans and the Japs is reoccupied by the forces of the United Nations, measures of relief and rehabilitation will have to be undertaken. Later, out of the experience of these temporary measures of relief, there will emerge the possibilities and the practicalities of more permanent reconstruction.

We cannot now blueprint all the details, but we can begin now to think about some of the guiding principles of this worldwide new democracy we of the United Nations hope to build.

Two of these principles must be liberty and unity or, in other words, home rule and centralized authority, which for more than 150 years have been foundation stones of our American democracy and our American union.

When Woodrow Wilson proposed the League of Nations, it became apparent that these same principles of liberty and unity--of home rule and centralized authority--needed to be applied among the nations if a repetition of the First World War was to be prevented. Unfortunately, the people of the United States were not ready. They believed in the doctrine of liberty in international affairs, but they were not willing to give up certain of their international rights and to shoulder certain international duties, even though other nations were ready to take such steps. They were in the position of a strong, well-armed pioneer citizen who thought he could defend himself against robbers without going to the expense and bother of joining with his neighbors in setting up a police force to uphold civil law. They stood for decency in international affairs, but in the world of practical international politics the net effect of their action or lack of action was anarchy and the loss of millions of lives and hundreds of billions of dollars in a second World War.

The sturdy pioneer citizen, proud of his own strength and independence, needed to be robbed and beaten only once by bandits to be ready to co-operate with his law-abiding neighbors. I believe the United States also has learned her lesson and that she is willing to assume a responsibility proportionate to her strength. England, Russia, China and most of the other United Nations are perhaps even more eager than the United States to go beyond the Charter which they have signed as a declaration of principles. The United Nations, like the United States 155 years ago, are groping for a formula which will give the greatest possible liberty without producing anarchy and at the same time will not give so many rights to each member nation as to jeopardize the security of all.

Obviously the United Nations must first have machinery which can disarm and keep disarmed those parts of the world which would break the peace. Also there must be machinery for preventing economic warfare and enhancing economic peace among nations. Probably there will have to be an international court to make decisions in cases of dispute. And an international court presupposes some kind of world council, so that whatever world system evolves will have enough flexibility to meet changing circumstances as they arise.

As a practical matter, we may find that the regional principle is of considerable value in international affairs. For example, European countries, while <I>concerned </I>with the problems of Pan America, should not have to be <I>preoccupied </I>with them; likewise Pan America, while <I>concerned</I>, should not have to be <I>preoccupied </I>with the problems of Europe. Purely regional problems ought to be left in regional hands. This would leave to any federated world organization problems involving broad principles and those practical matters which affect countries of different regions or which affect the whole world.

The aim would be to preserve the liberty, equality, security and unity of the United Nations--liberty in a political sense, equality of opportunity in international trade, security against war and business depression due to international causes, and unity of purpose in promoting the general welfare of the world.

In other words, the aim would be the maximum of home rule that can be maintained along with the minimum of centralized authority that must come into existence to give the necessary protection. We in the United States must remember this: If we are to expect guarantees against military or economic aggression from other nations, we must be willing to give guarantees that we will not be guilty of such aggression ourselves. We must recognize, for example, that it is perfectly justifiable for a debtor, pioneer nation to build up its infant industries behind a protective tariff, but a creditor nation can be justified in such policies only from the standpoint of making itself secure in case of war.

A special problem that will face the United Nations immediately upon the attainment of victory over either Germany or Japan will be what to do with the defeated nation. Revenge for the sake of revenge would be a sign of barbarism. But this time we must make absolutely sure that the guilty leaders are punished, that the defeated nation realizes its defeat and is not permitted to rearm. The United Nations must back up military disarmament with psychological disarmament--supervision, or at least inspection, of the school systems of Germany and Japan, to undo so far as possible the diabolical work of Hitler and the Japanese war lords in poisoning the minds of the young.

Without doubt, in the building of a new and enduring peace, economic reconstruction will play an all-important role. Unless there is careful planning in advance, the return of peace can in a few years bring a shock even worse than the shock of war.

The magnitude of the problem here in the United States, for example, is indicated by the probability that in the peak year of the war we shall be spending something like ninety billion dollars of public funds in the war effort, whereas two years later we may be spending less than twenty billion dollars for military purposes. In the peak year of the war effort, it is probable that we shall have around ten million men in the armed services and twenty million additional men and women producing war goods for the armed services. It would seem that within the first two years after the peace at least fifteen million of these thirty million men and women will be seeking jobs different from those which they had when peace came.

Our expenditures have been going at a rate fully seven times as great as in World War I and the conversion of our industry to wartime uses has been far more complete. Thousands of thoughtful businessmen and economists, remembering what happened after the last war, being familiar with the fantastic figures of this war, and knowing the severity of the shock to come, have been greatly disturbed. Some have concerned themselves with plans to get over the first year. Others have given thought to the more distant future.

It should be obvious to practically everyone that, without well-planned and vigorous action, a series of economic storms will follow this war. These will take the farm of inflation and temporary scarcities, followed by surpluses, crashing prices, unemployment, bankruptcy and in some cases violent revolution. If there is lack of well-planned and vigorous action, it is quite conceivable that the human misery in certain countries after the war may be even greater than during the war.

It is true that in the long run any nation, like any individual, must follow the principle of self-help, must look to its own efforts to raise its own living standards. But it is also true that stronger nations, like our own, can provide guidance, technical advice and in some cases capital investment to help those nations which are just starting on the path of industrialization. Our experience with the Philippines is a case in point.

The suggestions I have made with a view to promoting development and encouraging higher standards of living are necessarily fragmentary at this time. But in some quarters, either knowingly or unknowingly, they have been grossly distorted and misrepresented. During the recent political campaign one member of Congress seeking re-election made the flat statement that I was in favor of having American farmers give away a quart of milk a day to every inhabitant of the world. In other quarters these suggestions have been referred to by such terms as "utopian," "soggy sentimentality," and the "dispensing of milk and honey." But is it "utopian" to foresee that South America, Asia and Africa will in the future experience a development of industry and agriculture comparable to what has been experienced in the past in Europe and North America? Is it "soggy sentimentality" to hold out hope to those millions in Europe, and Asia fighting for the cause of human freedom--our freedom? Is it the "dispensing of milk and honey" to picture to their minds the, possible blessings of a higher standard of living when the war is over and their own productivity has increased?

Among the self-styled "realists" who are trying to scare the American people by spreading worry about "misguided idealists" giving away our products are some whose policies caused us to give away billions of dollars of stuff in the decade of the twenties. Their high tariff prevented exchange of our surplus for goods. And so we exchanged our surplus for bonds of very doubtful value. Our surplus will be far greater than ever within a few years after this war comes to an end. We can be decently human and really hardheaded if we exchange our postwar surplus for goods, for peace and for improving the standard of living of so-called backward peoples. We can get more for our surplus production in this way than by any high-tariff, penny-pinching, isolationist policies which hide under the cloak of one hundred percent Americanism.

Self-interest alone should be sufficient to make the United States deeply concerned with the contentment and well-being of the other peoples of the world. Such contentment will be an important contribution to world peace, for it is only when other peoples are prosperous and economically productive that we can find export markets among them for the products of our factories and our farms.

A world family of nations cannot be really healthy unless the various nations in that family are getting along well in their own internal affairs. The first concern of each nation must be the well-being of its own people. That is as true of the United States as of any other nation.

During the war, we have full employment here in the United States, and the problem is not to find jabs for the workers but to find workers for the jobs. After the war, it will be vital to make sure that another period of unemployment does not come on. With this end in view, the suggestion has been made that Congress should formally recognize the maintenance of full employment as a declared national policy, just as it now recognizes as national policies the right of farmers to parity of income with other groups and the right of workers to unemployment insurance and old-age annuities.

Full employment is vital not only to city, prosperity but to farm prosperity as well. Nothing contributes more to stable farm prosperity than the maintenance of full employment in the cities, and the assurance that purchasing power for both farm and factory products will always be adequate.

Maintenance of full employment and the highest possible level of national income should be the joint responsibility of private business and of government. It is reassuring to know that business groups in contact with government agencies already are assembling facts, ideas and plans that will speed up the shift from a government-financed war program to a privately financed program of peacetime activity.

This shift must be made as secure against mischance as if it were a wartime campaign against the enemy. We cannot afford either a speculative boom or its inevitable bust. In the war we use tanks, planes, guns and ships in great volume and of most effective design. Their equivalents in the defense against postwar economic chaos will be less spectacular, but equally essential. We must keep prices in control. We must have continuity in the flow of incomes to consumers and from consumers to the industries of city and farm. We must have a national system of job placement. We must have definite plans for the conversion of key industries to peacetime work.

When the war is over, the more quickly private enterprise gets back into peacetime production and sells its goods to peacetime markets here and abroad, the more quickly will the level of government wartime expenditures be reduced. No country needs deficit spending when private enterprise, either through its own efforts or in co-operation with government, is able to maintain full employment. Let us hope that the best thought of both business and government can be focused on this problem which lies at the heart of our American democracy and our American way of life.

The war has brought forth a new type of industrialist who gives much promise for the future. The type of business leader I have in mind has caught a new vision of opportunities in national and international projects. He is willing to co-operate with the people's government in carrying out socially desirable programs. He conducts these programs on the basis of private enterprise, and for private profit, while putting into effect the people's standards as to wages and working conditions. We shall need the best efforts of such men as we tackle the economic problem of the peace.

This problem is well recognized by the average man on the street, who sums it up in a nutshell like this: If everybody can be given a job in war work now, why can't everybody have a job in peacetime production later on? He will demand an answer, and the returning soldier and sailor will demand an answer. This will be the test of statesmanship on the home front, just as ability to co-operate with other nations for peace and improved living standards will be the test of statesmanship on the international front.

How thrilling it will be when the world can move ahead into a new day of peaceful work, developing its resources and translating them as never before into goods that can be consumed and enjoyed! But this new day will not come to pass unless the people of the United Nations give wholehearted support to an effective program of action. The war will have been fought in vain if we in the United States, for example, are plunged into bitter arguments over our part in the peace, or over such fictitious questions as government versus business. Such bitterness would only confuse us and cloud our path. How much more sensible it would be if our people could be supplied with the facts and then, through orderly discussion, could arrive at a common understanding of what needs to be done.

I have heard the fear expressed that after the war the spirit of self-sacrifice which now animates so many of our people will disappear, that cold and blind selfishness will supplant the spirit which makes our young men willing to go thousands of miles from home to fight--and die if need be--for freedom. Those who have this fear think that a return of blind selfishness will keep the nations of the world from joining to prevent a repetition of this disaster.

We should, approach the whole question, not emotionally from the standpoint of either sacrifice or selfishness, but objectively from & standpoint of finding the common meeting ground on which the people of the world can stand. This meeting ground, after all, should not be hard to find-it is the security of the plain folks against depression and against war. To unite against these two evils is not really a sacrifice at all, but only a common-sense facing of the facts of the world in which we live.

Now at last the nations of the world have a second chance to erect a lasting structure of peace--a structure such as that which Woodrow Wilson sought to build but which crumbled away because the world was not yet ready. Wilson himself foresaw that it was certain to be rebuilt some day. This is related by Josephus Daniels in his book, <I>The Life of Woodrow Wilson</I>, as follows:

"Wilson never knew defeat, for defeat never comes to any man until he admits it. Not long before the close of his life Woodrow Wilson said to a friend: 'Do not trouble about the things we have fought for. They are sure to prevail. They are only delayed. With the quaintness which gave charm to his sayings he added: 'And I will make this concession to Providence--it may come in a better way than we propose.' "

And now we of this generation, trusting in Providence to guide our steps, go forward to meet the challenge of our day. For the challenge we all face is the challenge of the new democracy. In the new democracy, there will be a place for everyone--the worker, the farmer, the businessman, the housewife, the doctor, the salesman, the teacher, the student, the store clerk, the taxi driver, the preacher, the engineer--all the millions who make up our modern world. This new democracy will give us freedom such as we have never known, but only if as individuals we perform our duties with willing hearts. It will be an adventure in sharing--sharing of duties and responsibilities, and sharing of the joy that can come from the give-and-take of human contacts and fruitful daily living. Out of it, if we all do our part, there will be new opportunity and new security for the common man--that blend of liberty and unity which is the bright goal of millions who are bravely offering up their lives on the battle fronts of the world.







Business Measures

An article from American Magazine, March, 1943.

p. 208.

Businessmen realize that the shock of this war's end will probably be at least seven times as great as that which was felt beginning in 1920. Peace unplanned could be a disaster worse than war, wrecking business, labor and agriculture throughout the entire world and producing revolution arid misery among the millions.

No businessman can plan for the future with any certainty so long as there is the fear of war on the horizon. It is vital, therefore, that the United Nations' covenant must provide the machinery to assure "freedom from fear"--an international peace law, an international peace court and an international peace force. If any aggressor nations take the first step toward rearmament, they must be served at once with a "cease and desist" order and be warned of the consequences. If economic quarantine does not suffice, the United Nations' peace force must at once bomb the aggressor nation mercilessly.

To guarantee the peace, the United Nations will need additional powers. We must prevent international cartels of the German type and perhaps substitute for them a United Nations agency to restore stable conditions in raw-material markets, on price terms that assure producers fair incomes and promote expanded consumption.

To prevent worldwide unemployment, there will probably have to be a United Nations investment corporation, under whose direction public and private capital can be put to work for worldwide reconstruction. If unemployment could be prevented without the use of government funds, there would be no need for such a corporation. But the postwar impact resulting from the sudden cessation of tremendous governmental spending everywhere in the world will make it absolutely necessary for governmental investment capital to be used on a very large scale to prevent the sudden and complete destruction of the capitalistic system.

This will not necessarily mean the reduction of private initiative. On the contrary, private initiative probably will be increased.

In launching such an investment program, the establishment of a network of globe-girdling airways ought to be the very first order of business.

After the peace of the world has been made secure, it should be possible to internationalize the large airports. The war has already brought the construction of many new airports, most of them for military purposes. With the coming of peace, and the expansion of commercial air service, many more will be needed. Boldness should be the guiding principle in planning a worldwide airport-construction program. When this war ends we shall be only at the threshold of the coming air age. Freedom of the air means to the world of the future what freedom of the sea meant to the world of the past.

Air travel will have an indirect but far-reaching effect on economic development. As people travel from country to country with greater ease, possibilities for utilizing the world's resources will be seen by men of daring and imagination, and they will lead the way in organizing new industrial projects of all kinds.

Boys and girls of the rising generation are already air-minded to a degree which is not possible far most of their elders who grew up earthbound. Educational courses in the future might well include airplane trips to one or more foreign countries. It is infinitely more important to make the people of the United Nations space-minded for peace than it was for Germany to make its people space-minded for war.

Rivaling aviation in its effect on future business development will be highway transportation. We in the United States can realize from our own experience what highways mean, for highways have been as essential as automobiles and motor trucks in the transportation revolution in this country in the last three decades.

One great road project which has been under way for nearly twenty years, and which is now within sight of completion, is the 9330-mile Pan-American Highway, extending from Laredo, Texas, to Buenos Aires, Argentina. This highway, known as the "lifeline of the Americas," is a monument to the co-operative spirit of the Western Hemisphere republics.

There will doubtless be a close relationship between airways and highways which follow the same intercontinental routes. To some extent, airports will be located along the highways, and both the airways and the highways will be fed from the same streams of commerce.

Improved transportation will be the key that will unlock the resources of the vast undeveloped regions of the world. We may expect the history of those regions in the next hundred years to parallel our own history in the last hundred years.

One of the great dramas of American history was the winning of the West. Following the War between the States, the railroads crossed the prairies at the rate of a mile a day. Farmers, ranchers, miners, cities, churches and schools followed.

A similar drama, unsung as yet, has been taking place in the Old World, as Russia has been winning her East. Most of Siberia, at the time of the fall of the Czars, was little more than wasteland occupied by Eskimos, herdsmen and political exiles. Less than sixteen million people occupied a land area twice as great as the United States. Today over forty million people live in the same area, with its new Siberian Pittsburghs, Bostons, Detroits. Great power dams, great mines and great factories are operated in a giant new industrial system. On the farms are tractors by the tens of thousands.

What the United States has done and what Russia is doing give a clue to what is possible in such regions as China, Alaska and Latin America.

China has coal, iron and other resources essential for industrial progress, but first must come improvement of agricultural production and transportation. More capital is one of China's primary needs, but even more she is in want of technical skill and guidance to utilize her resources effectively. It is in providing such guidance that the United States and the other United Nations can perhaps be of the most help.

Another region rich with new possibilities of industrial and agricultural development is the great Northwest--including Alaska, western Canada, and the northwestern portion of the United States. To such previously existing industries as fishing, lumbering and mining, the war has added shipbuilding, aluminum production and airplane manufacture. When peace returns, the Alcan Highway and other new transportation routes will lay the basis for further progress, and, with plenty of water power available, there will be the opportunity for great expansion in all the industries utilizing the mineral and forest resources which abound in the region.

Perhaps most challenging to the imagination of the modern businessman is the vast land of Latin America to the south.

An important point is the degree to which the projects can be made completely self-liquidating. Of course, in a broad sense, a loan to a government may be considered to be self-liquidating if it is used to build up the productive power of the country and results in an increased capacity for repayment. But many of the projects I have in mind would be self-liquidating even in the narrower sense.

The experience of our own Tennessee Valley Authority throws some light an what may be achieved through careful planning and skillful engineering. This experiment in regional planning, begun nearly ten years ago, has been a striking success.

There are practical people in the United States who believe that we have the "know-how" to help many of the poverty-stricken peoples to set their feet on the path of education, manual dexterity and economic literacy. If American missionaries of a new type, equipped with this "know-how," can work in co-operation with a United Nations investment corporation to develop flood-control works, irrigation projects, soil reclamation, rural electrification and the like, it will make possible an expansion in half the area of the world reminiscent of that which was stirring in our own land during its rapid growth from 1870 to 1910.

The new missionaries; if they are to make, their dreams come true in a really big way, must be able to grasp the enormous possibilities of combining governmental credit and organization with the drive of private initiative. The possibilities are all there--all just as practical and feasible as the growth of the United States.

To shift successfully from ninety billion dollars a year war production to ordinary peacetime activity will require the greatest resourcefulness and determination, the greatest outpouring of industrial energy, and the finest co-operative spirit among businessmen, farmers, workers, professional people and government officials that this country has ever seen.

Labor must go beyond hours, rates of pay and working conditions and, through the appropriate agency of government, co-operate vigorously with business in programs for full employment.

Agriculture must, through the appropriate agency of government, see that the parity principle now written into law operates justly under changing conditions of production and is effectively applied to feed the largest number of consumers at a reasonable price.

Businessmen must, in their governmental relationships, go much deeper than the customary consideration of taxes, economy, and disdain for bureaucrats. They must work actively with appropriate agencies of government in the administration of policies which will best increase productive power, balanced by an ever-increasing consumptive power flowing from a prosperous agriculture and from labor fully and productively employed.

The war, with all its hardship and its pain, has brought one blessing--it is providing a job for everybody who wants a job. We should resolve now that victory will not rob us of this blessing.

Much of the task of shifting to peacetime activity will have to rest upon the shoulders of the businessmen. In their task they will have the inspiration of the great progress of technology, accelerated by the war and the nationwide research programs organized by men in the armed services.

If the businessmen are engaged in home construction, they will have many new materials and devices to work with. If they are in automobile manufacturing, they will be able, through the use of aluminum and plastics, to produce cars that are lighter, more efficient, more comfortable and cheaper to operate.

If they are merchants, they will find a host of new products on the market, as the wartime accomplishments in making plastics are translated into peacetime goods. If they are in the food business, they will have the thrill of offering the public many new types of dehydrated and compressed foods, developed by the Army for the convenience of soldiers but adaptable to peacetime use. If they are in aviation, they can look forward to the introduction of the helicopter and the great changes and opportunities this type of plane will bring. 

In nearly every country of the world one of the most feasible projects will be construction of low-cost houses on a scale never before contemplated. Few people realize the multitude of construction devices and gadgets of all kinds which are available to make houses livable at lower cost. Here in the United States the possibilities are enormous. The field for new and better rural housing has scarcely been touched. In cities, the problem goes far beyond the matter of slum clearance and rehabilitation of blighted areas. It involves the construction of houses for individual ownership and of houses for rent by those people whose work forces them to shift their residence frequently.

If each of the United Nations will do its duty for its own people on the housing front, a considerable part of the postwar unemployment problem can be solved. But no matter how far the respective United Nations go with regard to housing projects and the expansion of normal consumption goods industries, there will be wide-scale unemployment unless some united agency is prepared to plan and finance on a self-liquidating basis international airports and similar projects of the greatest significance to the peace and prosperity of the entire world.

With all the initiative and daring of the businessmen, it is doubtful if, in the short time they will have, they can make the ninety-billion-dollar shift by their own efforts alone. They will need the help of government in various ways--the cushioning effect of "dismissal wages" for workers leaving war jobs, of "discharge bonuses" for men leaving the Army and the Navy, of plans for an orderly cancellation of war contracts, of provisions that will encourage the smaller companies to buy the war production plants from the government.

They will need the help of financial and tax policies which favor the maximum of individual incentive, but which do not shut out the rapid flow of government funds when these may be necessary for full employment. They will need the protection of government insurance of business transactions, as so successfully worked out in the guarantee of bank deposits and in the insurance of home mortgages under the Federal Housing Administration.

They will need the protection of the social-security system, broadened and strengthened. Social security is a splendid method of easing the individual worker and the business community over the rough spots. But we should recognize that the United States does not yet have a mature economy, and we should not look to a social-security program as a substitute, for dynamic, creative business energy and initiative.

In the situation that will face the United States and the world after the war, one might like to follow this course or that, according to his own personal inclinations. But, as is so often the case in the life of the individual, the decision comes down to a choice between very definite alternatives. On the one hand, the people of our country and of the world will have an opportunity to act boldly and imaginatively to organize the greatest utilization of the world's resources that history has ever seen. On the other hand, we confront the alternative prospect of suffering from a disillusionment like that which began in 1930--a disillusionment which will end inevitably in World War III, if not in a collapse sooner in the form of an epidemic of insurrections and revolutions, or the loss of democracy and the sinking into a state infinitely more static and regimented than the life of the Middle Ages.

The American businessman will rise to the challenge of the air age, to the challenge of the new frontier, to the infinite possibilities for development not only in our own country, but in the tropics and in Asia. Just as he has co-operated with government in time of war to build planes for the saving of civilization, so will he co-operate with government to make air power the preserver of civilization.

More and more, everyone will recognize that business, labor, agriculture, and government have just one job in their four-way partnership: to lead the common man to full employment, a higher standard of living, and a peace which will be permeated by the exciting spirit of new frontiers. The creative businessman of the future will recognize that, while government will play a large part in opening up these new frontiers, the government activity will be such as not to reduce but to increase the field for private initiative. Better government organization and more individual drive will go hand in hand.

The peace to come will be just as worthy of a supreme effort as the war is now. The men in the armed services are too intelligent to permit a dull, dead, dragging peace which will let the world drift into the maelstrom.

Airplanes and air power have eliminated the old significance of national boundaries. International airports and extensive international air travel will cause the American businessman to think in international terms as never before. The narrow selfishness of the past will more and more seem foolish and harmful. The seas will no longer separate the continents in the way they once did. Information and goods will flow with ever-increasing freedom.

Modern technology, the wings of the air, and the waves of the air mean that the common man will demand and get a better education and a higher standard of living. In serving the common man, the business leader will have opportunities for initiative such as he never dreamed of before.


American Tomorrow

A speech delivered in Detroit on July 25, 1943.

p. 238.


Three months ago in South America I found that the lowliest peon looked on President Roosevelt as the symbol of his dearest aspirations in the peace to come. So it is also in China and occupied Europe. I have known the President intimately for ten years and in the final showdown he has always put human rights first. There are powerful groups who hope to take advantage of the President's concentration on the war effort to destroy everything he has accomplished on the domestic front over the last ten years. Some people call these powerful groups "isolationists," others call them "reactionaries" and still others, seeing them following in European footsteps, call them "American fascists." Sooner or later the machinations of these small but powerful groups which put money and power first and people last will inevitably be exposed to the public eye.

My purpose today is to talk about the America of tomorrow. There are some who want to stick to what they would have us believe are the realities of the present. Their quick comeback to any question on our peace objectives is, "We must not discuss anything except the war." There are others who want to stick to what they hold are the realities of the past. They have a stock reply when asked about the peace: "Let us wait and see what England and Russia do before we make our plans."

Both opinions are fighting delaying actions against our destiny in the peace--a destiny that calls us to world leadership. When we as victors lay down our arms in this struggle against the enslavement of the mind and soul of the human family, we take up arms immediately in the great war against starvation, unemployment and the rigging of the markets of the world.

We seek a peace that is more than just a breathing space between the death of an old tyranny and the birth of a new one. We will not be satisfied with a peace which will merely lead us from the concentration camps and mass murder of Fascism into an international jungle of gangster governments operated behind the scenes by power-crazed, money-mad imperialists. Starvation has no Bill of Rights nor slavery a Magna Carta. Wherever the hopes of the human family are throttled, there we find the makings of revolt.

The world was waiting for us to take the initiative in leading the way to a people's peace after World War I, but we decided to live apart and work our own way. Hunger and unemployment spawned the criminal free-booters of Fascism, Their only remedy for insecurity was war. Their only answer to poverty and the denial of opportunity became the First Commandment of the Nazis: "Loot Thy Neighbor."

Much of our propaganda after the First World War proclaimed the ingratitude of our Allies. We had given of our best blood and our separate fortunes only to be labeled the land of Uncle Shylock. We changed it to Uncle Sap and said, "Never again." How many of us after this second worldwide scourge of suffering and death will say; "Never again"? Shall it be "Never again" to joining in seeking world peace? Shall it be "Never again" to living alone on an island of false security? Shall it be our second retreat from our responsibility in world co-operation?

Ours must be a generation that will distill the stamina and provide the skills to create a warproof world. We must not bequeath a second bloodbath to our children.

World leadership must be more concerned with welfare politics and less with power politics, more attentive to equalizing the use of raw materials of nations than condoning the policies of grab and barter that freeze international markets, more interested in opening channels of commerce than closing them by prohibitive tariffs, more mindful of the need for a stable currency among all countries than in high interest rates on loans. World leadership must be more occupied with preventing the political house burners from setting oil the fires of revolt than stopping them after they start.

But world co-operation cannot enforce such standards of international justice and security by paper diplomacy and remote control. Our choice is not between a Hitler slave world and an out-of-date holiday of "normalcy." The defeatists who talk about going hack to the good old days of Americanism mean the time when there was plenty for the few and scarcity for the many.

Nor is our choice between an Americanized Fascism and the restoration of prewar scarcity and unemployment. Too many millions of our people have come out of the dark cellars and squalor of unemployment ever to go back.

Our choice is between democracy for everybody or for the few--between the spreading of social safeguards and economic opportunity to all the people--or the concentration of our abundant resources in the hands of selfishness and greed. The American people have brought a brave and clear conscience to this crisis of all mankind. Every family, every community, feeling the denials and restraints of war, has been forced to search for a bed-rock of faith. And in that tomorrow when peace comes, education for tolerance will be just as important as the production of television. The creation of a decent diet for every family will take as much planning as the building of new cars and refrigerators and washing machines.

Along with Britain, Russia and China our nation will exert a tremendous economic and moral persuasion in the peace. But many of our most patriotic and forward-looking citizens are asking, "Why not start now practicing these Four Freedoms in our own backyard?"

<I>They are right!</I> A fuller democracy for all is the lasting preventive of war. A lesser or part-time democracy breeds the dissension and class conflicts that seek their solution in guns and slaughter.

We cannot fight to crush Nazi brutality abroad and condone race riots at home. Those who fan the fires of racial clashes for the purpose of making political capital here at home are taking the first step toward Nazism.

We cannot plead for equality of opportunity for peoples everywhere and overlook the denial of the right to vote for millions of our own people. Every citizen of the United States without regard to color or creed, whether he resides where he was born or whether he has moved to a great defense center or to a fighting front, is entitled to cast his vote.

We cannot offer the blueprints and the skills to rebuild the bombed-out cities of other lands and stymie the rebuilding of our own cities. Slums have no place in America.

We cannot assist in binding the wounds of a war-stricken world and fail to safeguard the health of our own people. We cannot hope to raise the literacy of other nations and fail to roll back the ignorance that clouds many communities in many sectors of our own nation. Democracy can work successfully for that future which is its predestined heritage only when all people have the opportunity for the fullest education. The world is a neighborhood. We have learned that starvation in China affects our own security--that the jobless in India are related to the unemployed here. The Post War Problems Committee of the National Association of Manufacturers (businessmen all) has wisely declared that increased production in other countries will not reduce living standards in the United States. Those twisters of fact who shriek that your Vice-President is a wild-eyed dreamer trying to set up T.V.A.'s on the Danube and deliver a bottle of milk to every Hottentot every morning should read that report. No business prospers without prosperous customers. That is plain common sense.

The average American may not be an expert on all phases of our economic and political life. He may not understand completely the complexities of money and markets. He may never feel completely at, home in the intricacies of world trade as they are affected by tariffs and cartels. He may not know too much about parity farm prices and subsidies. But the average American does know what happens when inflation comes--when prices rise faster than wages, and he knows that the worst lie of all is that the way to make money is to produce scarcity. The common man in America, and every American soldier overseas, wants free enterprise and full employment. He wants to see the great new war plants converted into plants producing peacetime goods. He knows that he and others have acquired new skills and they should be put to use. The average man of America knows that we can make and consume all goods which make for a higher standard of living. He wants and he must have a job, enough to eat and wear, decent shelter, his own home and automobile, and a chance to educate his children.

He knows that high tariff protection for our markets leads only to retaliation and boycotts by other countries. He knows that no coalition of nations can weather the innumerable impacts of money and trade monopolies. He witnessed the collapse of sanctions under the League of Nations and the growth of dictatorships that appealed to their. peoples by promising to free them from economic slavery. He is convinced that nations must be organized by something more, than trade pacts and non-aggression treaties. The peace-makers must have more daring and vision than the war-makers.

A year ago I cited the four duties of the people's revolution as I saw them. They were:<P><ol><li>The duty to produce to the limit.<li>The duty to transport as rapidly as possible to the field of battle.<li>The duty to fight with all that is in us.<li>The duty to build a peace--just, charitable and enduring.</ol>

Millions of our people from offices and factories, from farms, mines, oil fields and timber lands, have accepted those duties with typical American courage and fortitude. They are making heroic sacrifices to speed the victory. But if war has its duties, peace has its responsibilities. Three outstanding peacetime responsibilities as I see them today are these:<li>The responsibility for enlightenment of the people.<P><ol><li>The responsibility for mobilizing peacetime production for full employment.<li>The responsibility for planning world co-operation.</ol>

The American press, radio, school and church, free from domination by either government or corporate interest, can hold up to our people the vision of the freedom and abundance of the America that is to be. These great agencies of enlightenment can educate us with regard to the fundamental decencies and understandings which are essential if our power is to be a blessing to the world and not a curse.

Labor is beginning to do its part in enlightening the public. It is beginning to make crystal clear that 97 percent of labor has co-operated 100 percent with our government in the war effort. More and more in the future labor will demonstrate that it can co-operate with both employers and with agriculture in those measures which lead to increased employment, increased production and a higher standard of living. The people of America know that the second step toward Nazism is the destruction of labor unions. There are midget Hitlers here who continually attack labor. There are other demagogues, blind to the errors of every other group, who shout, "We love labor, but. . ." Both the midget Hitlers and the demagogues are enemies of America. Both would destroy labor unions if they could. Labor should be fully aware of its friends and of its enemies.

The second responsibility, that of mobilizing the peace for full production and full employment will challenge the best brains and imagination of our industries large and small, our trade associations, our labor unions and our financial institutions.

When the guns stop; America will find itself with the following assets:<P><ol><li>Manpower by the million; skilled workers from war industries, military manpower and young people coming of working age.<li>The largest industrial plant capacity in the world.<li>The greatest resources both natural and artificial to make peacetime products-and thousands of new inventions waiting to be converted to peacetime use.<li>The largest scientific farm plant in the world.<li>The biggest backlog of requirements for housing, transportation, communications and living comforts.<li>The greatest reserve of accumulated savings by individuals that any nation has ever known.</ol>

With such wealth, who says this nation is now bankrupt?

If industrial management can bring the same wisdom in producing for peace that it has shown on many production fronts in the supply, program for war, the horizons we face are bright. We have witnessed many evidences of industrial statesmanship, of co-operation with labor to increase production and cut costs. In hundreds of industries the war has demonstrated that management and labor can be friends in the service of the nation.

Our industries, trade associations and lending institutions will open wider the gates of labor's participation. They have the choice of approaching the new world of greatly expanded production with new energies and foresight--or they can hold back and fearfully await the stimulus of their government to expand production and consumption.

Whichever choice they consciously or unconsciously make, I believe they want to do their part in keeping this nation on solid ground when peace comes.

If we are to mobilize peace production in the service of all the people we must completely turn away from scarcity economics. Too many corporations have made money by holding inventions out of use, by holding up prices and by cutting down production.

I believe in our democratic, capitalistic system, but it must be a capitalism of abundance and full employment. If we return to a capitalism of scarcity such as that which produced both 1929 and 1932, we must anticipate that the returning soldiers and displaced war workers will speak in no uncertain terms.

The third responsibility--that of planning world co-operation--will stem from the open and full partnership between the people and their government.

We will face combustible realities when this struggle has passed. Even now there are millions in Europe and Asia who have only one thought, one question: "When do we eat?" Peace does not come where starvation stays. Peace is a mockery where millions of homeless and diseased are given only the freedom to die. America will have to fill many breadbaskets, help to restore homes and provide medical care here and in other lands before our own peace will be secure.

We know that a combination of countries seeking to limit our air commerce could shut off our international skyways. We know that a ganging-up by a group of international cartels at odds with us could wipe out our markets and sow the seeds of war. We know that we cannot close the doors on other nations and not expect them to close their doors on us. We know that imperialistic freebooters using the United States as a base can make another war inevitable.

In that knowledge we can create co-operation or conflict; unity of purpose or under-the-table dealing.

We must continue our teamwork with the British. We must become better acquainted with our new friends, the Russians. We can live peacefully in the same world with the Russians if we demonstrate to ourselves and the world after the war that we have gone in for all-out peace production and total consumer use of our products to bring about the maximum of human welfare.

Shouldering our responsibilities for enlightenment, abundant production and world co-operation, we can begin now our apprenticeship to world peace. There will be heartbreaking delays--there will be prejudices creeping in, and the fainthearted will spread their whispers of doubt. Some blueprints and many programs will be tested and found unworkable. Some men with selfish motives will use the propaganda of protest and the sabotage of delay to promote disunity in peace as they have in war.

But the day of victory for humanity will come just as this night of terror and desolation will pass. Nothing will prevail against the common man's peace in a common man's world as he fights both for free enterprise and full employment. The world is one family with one future--a future which will bind our brotherhood with heart and mind and not with chains, which will save and share the culture past and now aborning, which will work out the peace on a level of high and open cooperation, which will make democracy work for mankind by giving everyone a chance to build his own stake in it.

The challenge and the opportunity to win the battle of the peace has joined mankind. Victory demands our best thought, our best energies and our everlasting faith.



We Must Save Free Enterprise

An article published in the <I>Saturday Evening Post</I>, October 23, 1943.

p. 249.

Conversion of industry to all-out war was the dominant necessity in December of 1941. In the peace to come, reconversion to all-out production of peacetime goods will be our crying need. The way in which we handle the reconversion will determine whether we go the route of government control, monopoly control or free private enterprise. Granting that there is a place for a certain amount of governmental control and even supervised monopoly, I propose in this article to back the thesis that for full employment we must encourage the little man with a big idea.

The little man, bursting with initiative, has certain fears concerning war, peace, government, monopoly, debt and taxes. He looks at the war debt and sees it moving at a daily rate of $200,000,000 toward a total of $200,000,000,000 in 1944. Somebody will have to pay for this, and he fears the taxation will be so heavy that he dare not take a risk.

He fears that the large government plants may be taken over by monopoly groups or operated by the government itself. In the reconversion of his plants to peacetime pursuits, he fears the dead hand of priority and the allocation of materials. This problem is particularly perplexing, for his future economic well-being may depend upon the formula which will distribute materials essential to his operations during the transitional period of scarcity which will accompany demobilization.

The small businessman especially fears that, in the stampede for raw. materials, he will be elbowed and choked out of the market as he was elbowed and choked out of the major branches of war production. Let it not be forgotten that the Smaller War Plants Corporation came into the picture two years too late, and that a broad section of American small business died, unnecessarily. The small businessman has witnessed and felt the impact of war more keenly than any other section of the American economy.

It must be our resolve that small business shall not be the No. 1 economic casualty of this war.

The national debt, however, need not be an enervating mortgage on our future. In thinking about the national debt, we must rid ourselves of the customary preconceptions. Even though the Federal debt is rising to $200,000,000,000, the burden of annual interest will be light or heavy, depending on how well we maintain all-out production. It can be simply shown that, if our national income is kept going at a rate only 90 per cent of the present level, it will require only 7 per cent of our annual income to pay interest on both public and private debt. Such a percentage would be no greater than that devoted to the same purpose in 1929. The real problem, therefore, is to maintain full employment and balanced production on the necessary scale. If we succeed, it will be possible to carry this national debt without additional and unnecessary taxation.

The President has already indicated a program for the demobilization of the armed forces and outlined the machinery for an orderly transition. The time has come now when we should think in equally clear terms about demobilizing our war production.

In the critical period of demobilization, there are certain positive policies which may be invoked and certain basic evils which should be avoided: It will probably be necessary to have some public-works projects to provide employment in this period. Primarily, the task of re-employment is the responsibility of businessmen. It is a responsibility which they can meet only if enterprise is free to develop and extend the new lines of industry as well as the presently existing enormous plant capacity.

To aid business in carrying out this responsibility, the existing plants constructed by the government for the war effort should not fall into disuse. Neither should they become part of the philosophy of planned scarcity which is implicit in monopoly control. So far as practical, they should be turned over to private business and become part of our free private-enterprise system. Why not, for instance, lend-lease these plants to those American businessmen who are free of monopoly association and willing to engage in full production? Such men are entitled to encouragement and should be given every incentive to produce.

Among these incentives should be a reorganized tax program to expand production and create new industry. We must avoid the pitfalls of a tax program which gives incentive to speculation in securities rather than investment in productive enterprises and plant expansion. Our whole tax structure, including individual income, capital gains and corporate taxes, will need revamping to stimulate maximum production and employment.

We must reorganize the flow of credit in our economy so that the little businessman is not subject to the will of the private-monopoly groups who control credit. He must not be crushed by a system of private taxation. It should be made possible for the average businessman to obtain credit on fair and just terms.

Free private business must accept the responsibilities inherent in free private enterprise. It must give full employment and it must spur the full utilization of our productive resources. The alternative to the acceptance and the fulfillment by business of its responsibilities in a free private-enterprise economy is the increasing use of governmental agencies to assume this task. Government will have to do so if free private enterprise fails.

Capitalism throughout the world, and even in our own country, has often been the object of derision. Not its inherent faults but its misuse has been the underlying reason for this attitude. Considered in its essentials, however, capitalism can be the most efficient system of organizing production and distribution on principles of freedom and equal opportunity yet devised by man. It should not, as many radical reformers have suggested, be uprooted. It should be modernized and made to work. Indeed, it must be made to work if we are to maintain the foundations of those things which we believe to be the essentials of American society. The chief trouble with capitalism has been the perversion of its instruments and their misdirection by small, powerful, privileged groups for purposes they were never intended to achieve.

In recent years, numerous attacks have been made upon capitalism without distinguishing between capitalist institutions and their abuses. Among the principal economic devices of capitalism most frequently assailed are the corporation and the patent system. Too often, attempts to remedy evils which have sprung up in corporate practices or to correct improper uses of patents have been translated into attacks on patents and corporations in general. If criticism is to be constructive, it must recognize that there are other ways to cure a headache than by decapitation.

Like all institutions brought into being to serve men's needs, both the corporation and the patent system carried with them the possibilities of abuse by a privileged few. The multiplication of corporations which resulted from charter mongering by states led to practices which made it possible for the corporation to be used as a means of cheating the public. Corporation laws which promoted the concentration of economic power in the hands of small closed groups became barriers to free enterprise. The development of huge, unwieldy and cumbersome interests, unwilling to take risks, and fearful of competition from the smaller, more flexible, more resourceful businessmen, resulted in the stifling of new investment and a slowing down of the whole productive process.

Similarly, abuses crept into the patent system. Gigantic vested interests, posing as independent inventors and little businessmen, accumulated patent structures which not only blanketed whole areas of industry, but, in effect, channeled research and development as bulwarks for their own dominating position. Little inventors were crushed. Small businessmen could not compete with these vast aggregations of patents and capital. Small businessmen and inventors attempting to develop new processes and products found little protection in the patent when pitted against the power assembled in overgrown combinations.

This concentration of power has become one of the most serious conditions businessmen have ever faced. Cartels--industrial combinations which are not only national but international in scope--have acquired a degree and range of arbitrary power which threatens the very existence of small business and stifles the creative energy of our people. This is a far cry from the original goal set for patents by our Constitution: "To promote the progress of science and useful arts."

Among the steps which are worth considering toward correcting the abuses of the past is the enactment of a Federal incorporation law. Such a law would replace an evil which has become identified with the state of Delaware.

The patent system must be made to square with its original purpose as propounded by the Founding Fathers. It must give incentive and protection to the small and creative, and not be used as a weapon of oppression by large aggregates of wealth.

The age of enterprise, the era of adventure which began with the discovery of the New World, is yet young. The annals of progress have not been closed. In the truest meaning of the term, the United States today faces its greatest hour of opportunity and its greatest challenge to the aims and purposes which moved the founders of our nation to build in freedom an enduring society.

Because geographical frontiers are fast disappearing; it does not follow that the age of enterprise is over.

The exploration of our world by science, the mastery of natural forces and the creation of new material wealth offer unending possibilities to the daring -imagination and the zest for activity which have so long guided the outlook of America.

We know that the world stands at the beginning of a new era in human development. We know also that all beginnings are difficult. If we have the courage and the will to grasp the abundant means which are now at hand, there is every assurance that we shall be able to approach something of the supreme objectives for which this war is fought. In simple terms, it is said that we fight for freedom. Yet the economic content of this freedom hinges upon the full employment of our natural wealth and the full employment of our manpower, for purposes of peace no less than for purposes of war.

The dominant objectives before American industry today are the maintenance of a volume of production which the war has shown can be achieved, and the development of new avenues of activity for capital and labor alike. We must, in other words, find the way to create an expanding economy. We must protect the individual from oppression by the state or by vast aggregations of wealth. We must give to the businessman an incentive for production and the promise of profit for work well done.

In this task there are many things that government can do to stimulate free enterprise by positive action while safeguarding our heritage of natural resources. The conservation of our forests, our farm lands and our finite mineral reserves is properly within the sphere of government. At the same time there are many ways in which government can and should make possible the development of new industries by business. For example, in the development of power projects such as the TVA, a foundation is created on which free private enterprise can build. These are tasks which are public responsibilities. By serving the general welfare in this manner, government is not denying free private enterprise. Rather it is providing a stronger and surer support for economic progress and an. expanding economy. 



Jackson Day

A speech delivered on January 22, 1944.

p. 254.

We as individuals are here tonight because the people, suffering from the Hoover-Mellon-Wall Street collapse, demanded a New Deal. The people believed in Roosevelt, the Democratic party and the New Deal in 1932 because they felt that the New Deal stood for human rights first and prosperity rights second. The people confirmed their faith in Roosevelt and the New Deal in 1936 and 1940.

The New Deal is not dead. If it were dead the Democratic party would be dead, and well dead. But the Democratic party is not dead and the New Deal has yet to attain its full strength. The New Deal is as old as the wants of man. The New Deal is Amos proclaiming the needs of the poor in the land of Israel. The New Deal is New England citizens dumping tea in Boston Harbor. The New Deal is Andrew Jackson marching in the twentieth century. The New Deal is Abraham Lincoln preaching freedom for the oppressed. The New Deal is the New Freedom of Woodrow Wilson fighting the cartels as they try to establish national and international fascism. The New Deal is Franklin D. Roosevelt.

In the peace to come, the freedom of Jackson, Lincoln, Wilson and Roosevelt means the economic right of the people to the great abundance of the America of tomorrow. The freedom of Jackson, Lincoln, Wilson and Roosevelt in the peace to come also means that personal liberty must move hand in hand with that abundance. This freedom stands for justice and fair play for all the classes and all the regions in terms of the welfare of the plain folks.

The doorway to this freedom is blocked by the deliberate misrepresentation of the paid hirelings of the special interests. Because of these hirelings the worker on the farm and in the factory has often been condemned without a hearing as a saboteur of the war effort. These paid hirelings try to create dissension among the fighter on the farm, the fighter in the factory and the fighter at the front. They shall not succeed because all three fighting fronts have the same two objectives, quick victory in war, justice and jobs in peace. Justice and jobs for our workers and servicemen will give prosperity to our farmers and adequate profits for business.

The Democratic party will always be first in the hearts of the people if it applies to the ever-changing problems of war and peace the resolute courage and patient humanity of the founding fathers of the New Deal, Jackson and Lincoln.

One man more than any other in all history has given dynamic power and economic expression to the ageless New Deal. That man is Roosevelt. Roosevelt has never denied the principles of the New Deal and he never will. They are a part of his very being. Roosevelt, God willing, will in the future give the New Deal a firmer foundation than it has ever had before. So on with the New Deal, on with winning the war, and forward march for peace, justice and jobs. 


The Danger of American Fascism

An article in the New York Times, April 9, 1944.

p. 259.

On returning from my trip to the West in February, I received a request from <I>The New York Times</I> to write a piece answering the following questions:<P><ol><li> What is a fascist?<li>How many fascists have we?<li>How dangerous are they?</ol>

A fascist is one whose lust for money or power is combined with such an intensity of intolerance toward those of other races, parties, classes, religions, cultures, regions or nations as to make him ruthless in his use of deceit or violence to attain his ends. The supreme god of a fascist, to which his ends are directed, may be money or power; may be a race or a class; may be a military, clique or an economic group; or may be a culture, religion, or a political party.

The perfect type of fascist throughout recent centuries has been the Prussian Junker, who developed such hatred for other races and such allegiance to a military clique as to make him willing at all times to engage in any degree of deceit and violence necessary to place his culture and race astride the world. In every big nation of the world are at least a few people who have the fascist temperament. Every Jew-baiter, every Catholic hater, is a fascist at heart. The hoodlums who have been desecrating churches, cathedrals and synagogues in some of our larger cities are ripe material for fascist leadership.

The obvious types of American fascists are dealt with on the air and in the press. These demagogues and stooges are fronts for others. Dangerous as these people may be, they are not so significant as thousands of other people who have never been mentioned. The really dangerous American fascists are not those who are hooked up directly or indirectly with the Axis. The FBI has its finger on those. The dangerous American fascist is the man who wants to do in the United States in an American way what Hitler did in Germany in a Prussian way. The American fascist would prefer not to use violence. His method is to poison the channels of public information. With a fascist the problem is never how best to present the truth to the public but how best to use the news to deceive the public into giving the fascist and his group more money or more power.

If we define an American fascist as one who in case of conflict puts money and power ahead of human beings, then there are undoubtedly several million fascists in the United States. There are probably several hundred thousand if we narrow the definition to include only those who in their search for money and power are ruthless and deceitful. Most American fascists are enthusiastically supporting the war effort. They are doing this even in those cases where they hope to have profitable connections with German chemical firms after the war ends. They are patriotic in time of war because it is to their interest to be so, but in time of peace they follow power and the dollar wherever they may lead.

American fascism will not be really dangerous until there is a purposeful coalition among the cartelists, the deliberate poisoners of public information, and those who stand for the K.K.K. type of demagoguery.

The European brand of fascism will probably present its most serious postwar threat to us via Latin America. The effect of the war has been to raise the cost of living in most Latin American countries much faster than the wages of labor. The fascists in most Latin American countries tell the people that the reason their wages will not buy as much in the way of goods is because of Yankee imperialism.  The fascists in Latin America learn to speak and act like natives. Our chemical and other manufacturing concerns are all too often ready to let the Germans have Latin American markets, provided the American companies can work out an arrangement which will enable them to charge high prices to the consumer inside the United States. Following this war, technology will have reached such a point that it will be possible for Germans, using South America as a base, to cause us much more difficulty in World War III than they did in World War II. The military and landowning cliques in many South American countries will find it attractive financially to work with German fascist concerns as well as expedient from the standpoint of temporary power politics.

Fascism is a worldwide disease. Its greatest threat to the United States will come after the war, either via Latin America or within the United States itself.

Still another danger is represented by those who, paying lip service to democracy and the common welfare, in their insatiable greed for money and the power which money gives, do not hesitate surreptitiously to evade the laws designed to safeguard the public from monopolistic extortion. American fascists of this stamp were clandestinely aligned with their German counterparts before the war, and are even now preparing to resume where they left off, after "the present unpleasantness" ceases:

The symptoms of fascist thinking are colored by environment and adapted to immediate circumstances. But always and everywhere they can be identified by their appeal to prejudice and by the desire to play upon the fears and vanities of different groups in order to gain power. It is no coincidence that the growth of modern tyrants has in every case been heralded by the growth of prejudice. It may be shocking to some people in this country to realize that, without meaning to do so, they hold views in common with Hitler when they preach discrimination against other religious, racial or economic groups. Likewise, many people whose patriotism is their proudest boast play Hitler's game by retailing distrust of our Allies and by giving currency to snide suspicions without foundation in fact.

The American fascists are most easily recognized by their deliberate perversion of truth and fact. Their newspapers and propaganda carefully cultivate every fissure of disunity, every crack in the common front against fascism. They use every opportunity to impugn democracy. They use isolationism as a slogan to conceal their own selfish imperialism. They cultivate hate and distrust of both Britain and Russia. They claim to be super-patriots, but they would destroy every liberty guaranteed by the Constitution. They demand free enterprise, but are the spokesmen for monopoly and vested interest. Their final objective toward which all their deceit is directed is to capture political power so that, using the power of the state and the power of the market simultaneously, they may keep the common man in eternal subjection.

Several leaders of industry in this country who have gained a new vision of the meaning of opportunity through co-operation with government have warned the public openly that there are some selfish groups in industry who are willing to jeopardize the structure of American liberty to gain some temporary advantage. We all know the part that the cartels played in bringing Hitler to power, and the rule the giant German trusts have played in Nazi conquests. Monopolists who fear competition and who distrust democracy because it stands for equal opportunity would like to secure their position against small and energetic enterprise. In an effort to eliminate the possibility of any rival growing up, some monopolists would sacrifice democracy itself.

It has been claimed at times that our modern age of technology facilitates dictatorship. What we must understand is that the industries, processes, and inventions created by modern science can be used either to subjugate or liberate. The choice is up to us. The myth of fascist efficiency has deluded many people. It was Mussolini's vaunted claim that he "made the trains run on time." In the end, however, he brought to the Italian people impoverishment and defeat. It was Hitler's claim that he eliminated all unemployment in Germany. Neither is there unemployment in a prison camp.

Democracy to crush fascism internally must demonstrate its capacity to "make the trains run on time." It must develop the ability to keep people fully employed and at the same time balance the budget. It must put human beings first and dollars second. It must appeal to reason and decency and not to violence and deceit. We must not tolerate oppressive government or industrial oligarchy in the form of monopolies and cartels. As long as scientific research and inventive ingenuity outran our ability to devise social mechanisms to raise the living standards of the people, we may expect the liberal potential of the United States to increase. If this liberal potential is properly channeled, we may expect the area of freedom of the United States to increase. The problem is to spend up our rate of social invention in the service of the welfare of all the people.

The worldwide, agelong struggle between fascism and democracy will not stop when the fighting ends in Germany and Japan. Democracy can win the peace only if it does two things:<P><ol><li>Speeds up the rate of political and economic inventions so that both production and, especially, distribution can match in their power and practical effect on the daily life of the common man the immense and growing volume of scientific research, mechanical invention and management technique.<li>Vivifies with the greatest intensity the spiritual processes which are both the foundation and the very essence of democracy.</ol>

The moral and spiritual aspects of both personal and international relationships have a practical bearing which so-called practical men deny. This dullness of vision regarding the importance of the general welfare to the individual is the measure of the failure of our schools and churches to teach the spiritual significance of genuine democracy. Until democracy in effective enthusiastic action fills the vacuum created by the power of modern inventions, we may expect the fascists to increase in power after the war both in the United States and in the world.

Fascism in the postwar inevitably will push steadily for Anglo-Saxon imperialism and eventually for war with Russia. Already American fascists are talking and writing about this conflict and using it as an excuse for their internal hatreds and intolerances toward certain races, creeds and classes.

It should also be evident that exhibitions of the native brand of fascism are not confined to any single section, class or religion. Happily, it can be said that as yet fascism has not captured a predominant place in the outlook of any American section, class or religion. It may be encountered in Wall Street, Main Street or Tobacco Road. Some even suspect that they can detect incipient traces of it along the Potomac. It is an infectious disease, and we must all be on our guard against intolerance, bigotry and the pretension of invidious distinction. But if we put our trust in the common sense of common men and "with malice toward none and charity for all" go forward on the great adventure of making political, economic and social democracy a practical reality, we shall not fail.
