

[2E West 85-th Street, New York City.

~y dear lir.President:~

In reply to your letter of September 24 th Perm~t me to say that most of us like your smil an~ YøUr voice and your friendly spirit;but as for your wisdom we are skeptical,and as for the- New Deal it is an experiment with so many sides that no general judgment on it can be offered.It -is a hodge-podge of things good and bad,wise an~ foplish,sound and crazy,dangerous and com~endat1 Therefore public opinion is chaotic.You-can get

 . . anywhere a crowd to cheer you and also a crowd

t0 hiSB you.

~any of the best people with whom I am ac- q~ainted consider you a-dangerous man,all the- more-dangerous because~lf~;-your-gif~ts and-graces.

~ . . - - ~ . -: ~ - . - - .

- - !~- :~-- - - ,

In the opinion-of-multitudes of fair-minded-men

ù - : t_ -

you are guilty of three colossal blunders - -

ù ;~ ~ -~ - - . I -- - ~: K - --

ONE.You have-recklessly squandered our-mon- ey and piled up a national debt which will plagu us long after you are dead.

TWO.You have enlarged the United States Arm and Havy at a time when such a B tep was inexcusa

ble.Our Government had just agreed to renounce ~ar as an instrument of nationa1 policy and had Promised to seek the solution of all internat- ional dieputes only by pacific means,and before the ink was dry on the paper~you came-forward , saying,Let us have more ships and more guns.~hen the world was trying hard to turn its face-in a new direction and when lovers-of ~ankind were dreaming of a reduction of armaments~you~lifted ~ up your voice saying,let us increase our armament We were looking for a new deal and you gave us the ~ld deal.You talk peace but you are a milita rist at heart.You had the chance to turn a new

  age in the-history of mankind and you refused to do it.We pity you and-are ashamed~of you.~

~ THh~.You-destroyed-food when men-women~and

: ~ -::: ~ , ~ ~: ~ --: ~ -:. ~ :

children-were--starving.This is-a~-damned spot on your admin'istration which will notlout.It was a 






 sin against humanity and will never be-forgiven.,

  tFor this-crowning outrage' of the century you and your advisere deserve the execration of generatic yet unborn.

Your smile and your voice and your good na- ture cannot cover up your false theories or lead us to forget your inconsistencies and your bro- ken promises and your dangerous policies.It is my conviction that a great ~ajority of the sanest people in our country are afraid of you,and were it not for the fact that the age is infested by divers lunacies and hoodwinked by demagogues of

many stripes you ~7ould stand no chance whatever of reelection.

Sincerely yours,

The Honorable Franklin D. Roosevelt, The White House, Fashington,D.C.

Hy dear Mr. President:-

I regret that a long journey through the south visiting our schools has prevented mœ; from .~`riting you sooner in re~ly to your letter of Se~t. 23,1935.

~hiIe on this journey,however,I decided to get the facts concerning the condition of the Negro and attempt to learn whether or not the various govern- ment agencies created to sustain and rehabilitate the citizens of the country generally,were really being of any great service to the Negro. Our scnools,in which we had about ten thousand Negroes enrolled this last year in the regl1Pr and s~ecial courses~proved a good source from which to gain such information.

I am sorry indeed to report that I found that the racial discrimination which we knoa exists has expressed itself in the matter of giving government aid |to the Negro. Naturally~a large number of Negroes are on relief and receiving ~help in that way The Negro being at the bottom of the economic scale under ~normal conditions,had that "bottom"sink beneath him under depressed times. Hun- dreds of the positions he used to have were taken by ~hites which forced the Negro to go on relief ln ~arger numbers than ever before. His schools have run shorter terms,he has suffered from every angle and-lo~Dt a good part of the little he possessed in the matter of property. I am told that the trouble regarding the ~obtaining of farm loans has been that the final authority regarding these was ~vested in a local committee and that altho appeal could be made to a State comm- |ittee and then to W'ashingtor.,in the end the matter ~as invariably settled by the ~ocal committee and the main eœfect of the a;peals was to anger the local comm- ~ttee to the point where it gave the Negro no chance for help. The Negroes to Whom I have talked say that the only remedy for these conditions is for rJash- ~ngton to learn the real facts in the case by sending about undercover agents, hnknown to anyone locally. I am inclined to agree with them Racial discrimin- ation ~-orks in most subtle ways its ends to accom~lish!

Strange as it may seem,the Negro resents being o ~ f. Yet ~e see today '~hat he gets 1ittle or no~conslderation unless he 1s in that unhap~;y state. If he needs financial assistance to educate his children,and noble are the sacrifices being made in that endeavour these days,he can't get tnat aid frcm the government unless he is an absolute object for charity Tnis seems unfortunate indeed and reflect5 upon our social intelligence as ~ell.

TWO NEW DEALS AND AN INQUIRY: FRANKLIN ROOSEVELT WRITES  THE CLERGY

Angie Fluckiger 






 Fabian Garcia Ray Geller Jill Richmond Tim Warren

~ ::: ~

I ~: :~ ,+

It was 1935 and the presidential election was a year away. Roosevelt had spent four years fighting the Great Depression with dozens of New Deal policies. He had sought advice in making these policies from all kinds of people. He had looked to young lawyers and administrators for advice. He consulted with Columbia University professors, who were referred to as his "Brain Trusts". He had sought flexible economic policies, unlike Hoover, that would bend to meet the needs of the times. But where did he stand? Clearly, President Roosevelt was under fire from the conservative right and the liberal left. Pushed from the left to do more, and criticized from the right from what he had done, Roosevelt could no longer stand in the middle. It was at this point, in 1935, that Roosevelt let his instincts to simply help people lead him further to the Left.

To the rich, Roosevelt had turned against his class. Conservatives had formed the Liberty League in 1934 as a coalition against the New Deal policies. They thought Roosevelt was spending was leading the nation toward socialism. The conservative Supreme Court struck down the NRA (National Industrial Recovery Act), which had helped laborers and unions achieve better working conditions. They later revoked the AAA (Agricultural Adjustment Act).

But these New Deal policies which enacted government intervention did not come under fire only from the wealthy. Because being poor in American had always been looked upon as the poor person's fault, many middle class, as well as low income families, were angry with society at large getting help from the government. They felt that Roosevelt's financial policies to the poor would lead the poor to take advantage of them, and that the poor would simply lay back and enjoy being lazy. This attack from low income/middle class members of society is shown in letters Roosevelt received in a response he had evoked from the nation's clergy. In 1935, Roosevelt wanted to see how Americans were feeling about the New Deal policies. He wanted to touch base with "the people." He called on all clergy, who were in touch with millions of people from their congregations, to let him know how they felt. Surprisingly, many clergymen expressed anger toward several New Deal policies. Many believed that the NRA made their neighbors lazy. Many thought the W.P.A. was given to the undeserving. Many were concerned with the national debt America was accruing from the new Deal policies. The  philosophy that the poor were poor by choice, coupled with fear of socialism and communism, was very widespread and deeply ingrained in the American consciousness.

But Roosevelt also had the liberal Left condemning him. One of the biggest thorns in his side came from an unlikely senior citizen, Dr. Townsend. Townsend, a resident of Long Beach California, spoke for the nation's elderly. Many seniors had lost their life savings in the bank failures, and with not pension plans or retirement funds, they had become destitute. In 1933 Townsend wrote a letter to the Long Beach Telegraph, a newspaper with a large circulation, outlining a simple plan to help these senior citizens. His plan was called the Old Age Revolving Pension Plan. This plan would give $200 a month to people over the age of 60. To get the money, they would have to retire from their jobs, giving younger people more job opportunities. They would also be required to spend all the money each month. This would pump the money back in to the economy. The idea spread like wild fire. Not only were senior citizens in favor of it, but children with elderly parents, who could barely make ends meet supporting their own children and were supporting their parents, agreed with the plan unanimously. Pro-Townsend plan people formed clubs, and spread the word. Soon, over 12,000 Townsend clubs were not only formed, but they were taking their issues to Washington.

Pressure from this contingency was the reason Roosevelt created the Social  Security plan, which has carried over to today. And many ministers and their congregations were behind the plan 100%. This law had already been in effect in England and Germany. And it was one of the only new Deal policies that didn't come under attack from the Left or the Right.

Whatever pressures Dr. Townsend's Old Age Revolving Pension Plan brought to bear on Roosevelt and his administration they were not nearly as hostile and politically contentious as those advocated by two other increasingly dissatisfied and left-leaning Americans. One, a Senator and former Governor of Louisiana named Huey Long and the other a Catholic priest named Father Charles Coughlin who, throughout the 1920's and especially in the 1930's hosted an enormously popular radio program called, "Radio Priest."

Huey r ong is one af the great and end~rin~, !e,gends of !nodern-day A.m.~ricar. -- politics. Born to a middle class northern Louisiana family in 1893, Long nursed a lifelong resentment of big business and the elite members of American society who controlled it. After an early career as a traveling salesman, Long graduated from Tulane University with a law degree in 1915. In 1918, he began his political career when he was elected to the Louisiana Railroad Commission. In 1928 he was elected governor of the state and two years later U.S. Senator. By 1936, at the age of 42 he was dead-shot by the son of a political opponent as he raced through the corridors of his homestate's Capitol Building in Baton Rouge.

But these facts by themselves hardly illustrate the vitality of Long's relatively brief political career or the effect he had on Louisiana and, for a time, national politics as well. Long was a consummate politician who identified himself with the poor and the disenfranchised members of society, he was also a brash and at times ruthless leader who, once he had secured his enormous power base made it his business to control every aspect of Louisiana political life. He ruled, some said, like a dictator, and yet he used his power to undeniably good ends, building many roads, bridges, schools and hospitals which benefited the mostly poor population of his state. For these acts he secured their undying loyalty; to his enemies, he became a force that could not be ignored.

This same sense of power and persuasion and its appeal to "the common man" translated easily enough onto the national stage at the height of the Great Depression. In some ways Louisiana can be seen as a microcosm-a Southern laboratory-of the United States in which Long was able to perfect his rhetoric and to develop his populist philosophies. In 1932, when Franklin Roosevelt ran for President, Long backed him. But as Long's own popularity grew and with it his ambitions, and as the New Deal policies which grew out of the Hundred Days failed to solve the problems of the Depression, he began to turn away from Roosevelt. In 1934 Long made a decisive break with Roosevelt when he denounced the New Deal as a failure and began trying to sell Americans on his own "Share Our Wealth" Plan. Long's solution was to impose a 100% tax on all incomes over $1 million and all inheritances over $5 million. The revenue from these taxes would then be distributed throughout the remainder of the American population, guaranteeing each family an income of $2000 a month. Americans liked the sound of Long's plan and quite suddenly Share Our Wealth Societies began forming throughout the country, as Long took to the airwaves delineating its finer points. As Long pushed his plan he also let it be known that he would not be adverse to running for the presidency himself, but the bullet which killed him in September of 1935 ended any possibility of such a contest.

Father Charles Coughlin, was another onetime ally to the Roosevelt administration who turned critic in 1934. Like Long, Coughlin's disenchantment with Roosevelt and his administration began at first with only minor irritation and some slight skirmishes; but by December of 1935-two months after the death of Long-Coughlin openly admitted that he was no longer in league with the President or his New Deal policies. Six months later, when he and North Dakota Senator William Lemke attempted to form the Union Party with the acharismatic Lemke as its candidate for president, Coughlin's political break with Roosevelt would be complete.

Amongst the troika (Long, Townsend and Coughlin) of Roosevelt's leftist critics, Coughlin, as a political figure, was perhaps the most unlikely, if only because he was a priest. And in fact, the first three years of Coughlin's "Radio Priest" were mostly confined to spiritual homilies and the like. Occasionally Coughlin spoke out against the KKK (who had planted a burning cross on the front lawn of his newly built Church of the Little Flower in 1926) or against the evils of birth control, but otherwise his sermons lacked political content. But with the onset of the Depression, Coughlin-who from his youth had been restless and assertive by nature-began to see political commentary as a part of his calling.

And America was very receptive to Coughlin. After the high-flying, free- wheeling, big spending 1920's the Depression hit Americans like a ton of bricks. In such times, inevitably, people look for spiritual solace, and yet, even as they looked heavenward for comfort and solutions, practical matters more than ever demanded their attention. Coughlin, mixing spiritual guidance with a fervent call for social betterment, was inspired by this combination of needs in the American people and he sought every week to meet those needs in his sermons. Americans, in turn, responded by tuning in- though it is impossible to know for sure, it is estimated that at the height of Coughlin's popularity in 1933-4, as many as 40 million people heard his "Radio Priest," show every week!

By the time of Franklin Roosevelt's election then in 1932, Coughlin was quite certain about his dual role as both a spiritual leader and a political commentator; Roosevelt in turn was aware of Coughlin's huge popularity, and the two men seemed to come together in their views for a time. Privately however, Roosevelt was wary of Coughlin, sensing his arrogance and unwieldy ego upon their first meeting. Graduall those same qualities in Coughlin would alienate his listeners and effectively end his public career.

But in early 1934, in the period following Roosevelt's Hundred Days-in the wake of the "First" New Deal-Coughlin, Long and Townsend were all just about to crest in their own popularity. Roosevelt on the other hand, suddenly seemed at the point of floundering. The President was walking a fine line; though Congress, under his forceful direction had implemented a number of dramatic changes in fiscal and social policy, he was wary of going too far. He had always been deeply respectful of"society's institutions," and yet he had come in to offfice promising to break with "foolish traditions," and knowing the necessity of that.

And yet, to the conservative factions of American society and to the conservative majority of the Supreme Court, Roosevelt's New Deal policies seemed to be trampling on the most sacred traditions of the Constitution. Roosevelt, himself a member of America's "patrician" class, was viewed by many of its remaining members as a traitor to them. In 1934 a number of disaffected business leaders together with conservative Democrats who had never been big fans of Roosevelt's, joined together to form the American Liberty League, to work against what they considered the Administration's "radical" policies. And in May of 1935 the Supreme Court finally made its conservatism felt when it ruled that Roosevelt's NRA provided him with an unconstitutional degree of legislative power.

On the other hand, men like Townsend, Long, and Coughlin, felt that Roosevelt's reforms had been too timid, too limited and too inconsistent. They wanted the social welfare programs to go further and deeper into American society; to shake down the status quo, and to raise up the for-generations denied "forgotten" man.

While these pressures from both the Left and the Right no doubt affected Roosevelt he did not respond to either force rashly. But when he felt the time was right-and when, no doubt, he thought he hadn't much more time to waste-Roosevelt did act dramatically. In June of 1935, just as the Congress was preparing to recess, Roosevelt insisted that they stay in session long enough to vote on four important bills that lay before them. These bills gave way to even more legislative activity, and by the summer such cornerstones as the National Labor Relations Act (or the Wagner Act), the Social Security Act The Utilities Holding Company Act, and the WPA, had been voted into being. Thus, the legislative period of the "Second New Deal" came to an end.

And so on August 25"', 1935, The New York Time.s front page bore the headline "ALL OF ROOSEVELT'S BILLS ARE ENACTED," and below that, a separate but related article proclaimed, "PRESIDENT SCORES TORIES"; below that, "He Urges the Younger Generation to Challenge Old Order's Methods" and then a quote, "'Rules Are Not Sacred, They Must Be Changed for More Complex Life,' He Says." These headlines represent Roosevelt's mastery of a political situation; seemingly in one fell swoop, Roosevelt took on both his conservative and his liberal enemies. To the latter he proved that he could move-when he wanted-whatever mountains were necessary (i.e., Congress) in order to further his reforms, and to the former he offered his scorn by aligning himselfwith progress and the future via his message to America's youth.

And so by the end of the summer Roosevelt could rest assured that he had at the very least waged a vigorous campaign to shore up his flagging New Deal, in the process answering critics on all sides. However, still facing an election year, Roosevelt may have felt that he had won the battle but not yet the war. He knew that his real critics and those he had really to answer to were his constituents. And so on September 24'h he sent out a "How'm I doin'?" letter, addressed to the nation's clergy. By that date, Huey Long- perhaps the most serious threat to Roosevelt's upcoming campaign-had been killed, and though Father Coughlin was still an important political force his increasingly strident attacks on the Administration were beginning to undermine him; Francis Townsend had been taken care of with the Social Security Act signed on August 14'h. It is possible then to read Roosevelt's letter to the clergy, and to see his questions within that letter, as the more pure inquiry they purport to be, and less as propaganda. In the letter Roosevelt states that he is turning to the clergymen ". . . for counsel and advice-feeling confident that no one else can give more unbiased views." The purpose of the letter seems to be for Roosevelt to gain as much information as possible about the many diverse communities and their inhabitants that the clergy oversee, so that the policies enacted over the summer of 1935 might be administered most eff~ciently, and beneficially. But read Roosevelt's letter to the clergy for yourself, and then read the four replies selected here, and tell us what you think.

 
